source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sat, 6 Jan 1996 19:36:15 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject:  A wish list for microtonal
 synthesizers
---
Let me tell you a story...
The tale starts back in 1975, when Hal Alles
at Bell Labs designs a spiffy board that 
spits out 256 separate additive sine waves &
uses it to build the Bell Labs DIgital
Synthesizer.
Fast forward to 1978:
Crumar (then a big synth manufacturer, now
defunct) decided to build a digital synthesizer
based on Alles' board.
4 years later, Crumar rolled out the Synergy.
This instrument was controlled by (gasp!)
two Z-80 chips.  Super hi-tech, eh?  Wow!
A full eight bits of computing power! And
running at the awesome speed of 4 Mhz!!!  
Well, now that the laughter's over, here's
a sobering thought:
The Synergy STILL has, even TODAY, by far
the most complex architecture of any digital
synthesizer ever built.
Hello!
Ensoniq?
Are you there?
Q: What's the most important part of any
synthesizer?
A: Envelopes, envelopes, envelopes!
The complexity of the synthesizer's envelopes
ENTIRELY determines how complex and subtle its
sounds can be.
A synth with the world's most elaborate synthesis
algorithm, the most exotic & beautiful wavetables
ever designed, and the most sophisticated effects
buss in christendom, still sounds like crap if it
uses crude 4-stage ADSR envelopes for the 
oscillators.
It's shocking and alarming to me that the Synergy,
designed in 1978, STILL has not been approached in
the sophistication and flexibility of its envelopes.
The Synergy allowed up to 16 envelope points
for each oscillator. You could set any two of
the points as loop points for sustain
when the key was held down.  
But wait!  There's more!
You voiced each oscillator TWICE--one 16-point
envelope for minimum key velocity, the other
16-point envelope for maximum key velocity.
Then the synth interpolated between those
2 envelopes in real time for all other 
key velocities.
This gave the oscillators a remarkably subtle
"lifelike" quality.
But wait!  There's more!
You also voiced each oscillator TWICE for
the frequency envelopes--which could also
contain up to 16 points, for both min and max
key velocity.
The synth gave you a pool of 32 oscillators.
You could assign 'em any way you liked.
You could add oscillators or use 'em to 
modulate one another--MORE flexibility.  Not
only that, but you could choose from 8 different
waveforms--for each individual oscillator.
But wait!  There's more!
Lastly, the Synergy let you set the amplitude
of each oscillator for each group of 3 keys--this
was essentially what Yamaha now calls "fractional
scaling."  
In effect, a digital formant filter.
The result?
Unparallelled subtlety and complexity of sound.
The Synergy has NEVER been equalled by ANY
other digital synthesizer in this regard.
It had aperiodic vibrato--that is, it allowed you
to mix a controllable amount of digital noise
with the LFO...again, giving the Synergy
a remarkable lifelike vibrato or tremolo.
Now, let's fast-forward 20 years...
Desktop supercomputers...cheap 1 gig disk drives...
magneto-optical storage...DSP chips cranking out
hundreds of MIPs...Csound on desktop machines
running at lightning speeds...
And guess what?
NO synthesizer manufacturer has YET implemented
envelopes REMOTELY as flexible and complex
as those on the antique 2-Z-80-controlled
Synergy of 1978.
C'mon, folks!
The problem CAN'T be hardware!  We've got hardware
up the wazoo.  We can handle such a synthesis 
architecture with elan.  Today's synths could eat 
those kinds of envelopes for breakfast.
Yet no one, absolutely NO synthesizer manufacturer,
has implemented such flexible envelopes.
To its credit, Ensoniq has done slightly better
than the rest of the synth manufacturers in this
regard.
Ensoniq's 8-point interpolating amplitude envelopes
are the closest I've seen...but that ain't 
too close.
As a microtonal composer, my most basic need
is for a synthesizer with complex, flexible envelopes
each of whose oscillators can be precisely detuned.
The ideal would be a synth that can do what my
Csound instruments do: a synth that allows
20-point frequency AND amplitude envelopes with
30 to 60 oscillators at a time in real time.
Offer me such a synth with a tuning table, and I'll
fight through a nest of amphetamine-crazed
echidnas to buy it.
Until then, I gotta ask myself: why does the latest
issue of Confuser Music Urinal make a big deal
about an article that describes a chip with 127
additive oscillators?
C'mon, folks.  The Synergy offered 32 oscillators
(2 banks of up to 16 each) back in 1978. 
Gimme a break.
It's time we moved up to the level of sophistication
attained 20 years ago with a pair of 4 Mhz eight-
bit Z-80s, don't you think?
--mclaren


Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Mon, 8 Jan 1996 16:48 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id HAA13530; Mon, 8 Jan 1996 07:48:32 -0800
Date: Mon, 8 Jan 1996 07:48:32 -0800
Message-Id:  <9601080749.aa17311@cyber.cyber.net>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu