source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sun, 5 Nov 1995 14:30:11 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: academia, jibes, hurt feelings, the search 
  for truth
---
With his usual insight and common sense, Bill Alves
offered some tart rejoinders to my posts on 
psychoacoustics.
As to the question of who is or is not ignorant, it is 
sufficient to observe: "Hic ego barbarus sum quia non
intelligor illis."  But Alves' point about my  "bigoted 
statements about academics" is right on the money.
Your Humble E-Mail Correspondents pleads guilty...
with an explanation.
To paraphrase Richard Preston, "Music is a lesser activity
than religion in the sense that we've agreed not to kill each
other but to discuss things."  To the extent that any of
my statements about academia or people with PhDs has
hindered the discussion on this forum, or poisoned it
with unnecessary bad feeling, I certainly apologize.
For making bigoted statements about no-talent academics
who try to maintain a brain-dead status quo, however,
I do NOT apologize.  I *AM* bigoted against such people. 
I intend to *continue* my bigotry against such people,
and wherever possible to deeper and broaden the scope
of my bigotry against these no-talents.  I make no apologies 
whatsoever for this kind of bigotry.  On the contrary: I
*celebrate* this kind of bigotry.  Indeed, in an apotheosis
 of political incorrectness, I *glory* in my bigotry
against people with big reps and no competence,  big
degrees and no talent, big grants and no imagination.
I exult in my capacity to distinguish twixt crap and
the beaux arts.  If this is bigotry, *great.*  Sounds like
a PLAN!  
Lemme at 'em!  
Come get some, !@#%#+#@%$ers!
It's hard to say whether the no-talent duffers are in the
majority or the minority in music departments.  Many folks
with PhDs in music use a kind of protective coloration: they
keep a low profile, don't make waves, and quietly go about
their radical xenharmonic explorations while giving an
outward appearance of conformity to the Perversions of
New Music ideal. (Namely, that the very model of the modern
composer is one who talks and talks and talks and talks, and
hardly every produces any music...and then only dribs and drabs
of warmed-over Webern and kludged-up Cage.  Above all, ya
gotta have a theory!  Theeee-ory!  Theeee-ory!  Git yer red-hot 
theee-ory! Ice cold muuu-sic, red hot theeee-ory!
Can't enjoy the music without a theee-ory!)
Many of the academics who subscribe to this forum are
extraordinarily talented polymaths.  For example, Larry
Polansky fills me with awe: this guy not only writes 
original & groundbreaking articles, he's not only a terrific
teacher & thesis adviser (by all accounts), he's not only
a fine amateur ethnomusicologist, but he's also a world-class
computer programmer *AND* a startlingly talented composer.
Is there *anything* this guy can't do?  Is he in next year's
olympics?  Has he climbed Mount Kilamanjaro yet? Will
he be the first xenharmonist in space?
William Schottstaedt is another example.  A top-notch
programmer, able to design entire object-oriented music
languages in a single bound, debug cranky antique computer
systems faster than a speeding bullet, but then he ducks
into a phone booth and becomes...a world-class composer.
Amazing.
David Cope is not only a fine composer, by all accounts a
splendid teacher, an excellent writer (the "New Directions
In Music" books are classics of their kind in each of their
various editions), but he's also a world-class AI music
programmer whose LISP syntactic models of composition
have broken genuinely new ground in the field.  
Astounding.
Johnny Reinhard is not only one of the world's great
scholars of microtonality, a bibliomane with the most
impressive library of microtonal scores on the planet,
an administrative wizard who single-handedly forced
the New York concert scene to bow to microtonality,
AND a living link between thousands of xenharmonic 
composers, researchers and performers...but Johnny 
is *also* the reincarnation of Jimi Hendrix as a 
bassoon player.  Virtuoso par excellence.
And speaking of universally talented people...
William Alves himself is an extremely impressive guy.
Not only a first-rate JI composer, but a scholar of
tuning history, a crack computer programmer, a DSP
wizard, *and* a fine teacher (by all reports).  Another
polymath.
To continue in this vein would  embarrass *a great many*
PhDs who subscribe to this forum...  Suffice it to say that
this tuning forum represents an extraordinary confluence
of exceptionally talented academics.  It's fashionable to claim
that "the day of the Renaissance man (woman? person?) is
past."  Whoever believes this hasn't logged onto the tuning 
forum.
Having said all that, permit me to add not my own words,
but those of Norbert Weiner:
"What sometimes enrages me and always disappoints and
grieves me is the preference of great schools of learning
for the derivative as opposed to the original, for the
conventional and thin which can be duplicated in many
copies rather than the new and powerful, and for arid
correctness and limitation of scope and method rather
than for universal newness and beauty, wherever it
may be seen." [Weiner, Norbert, "The Human Use of
Human Beings," 2nd edition., 1954, pg. 135]
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Mon, 6 Nov 1995 00:48 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id OAA10844; Sun, 5 Nov 1995 14:48:24 -0800
Date: Sun, 5 Nov 1995 14:48:24 -0800
Message-Id: <199511052247.RAA08615@freenet3.carleton.ca>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu