source file: mills2.txt
Date: Mon, 28 Oct 1996 21:30:05 -0800

Subject: Re: TUNING digest 878

From: kollos@cavehill.dnet.co.uk (Jonathan Walker)

Johnny Reinhard (Sun, 27 Oct 1996)

> Please understand this as a salve to understanding.  1200 points on a
> line representing an octave is a continuum.  Would 1300 or 2000 points
> make a discernable difference?  I think 1200 is just past the 
> threshold of pitch accuity for human beings. In essence this is the
> digital equivalent to CDs and DATs.  So much pitch information is
> available as to appear infinite.  Nice proportion, I think.

Thanks for the reply. I'm perfectly happy with cents measurement 
wherever it may be appropriate, and with the size of the unit (although 
I can still hear beating easily enough at mid-range frequencies with a 
quarter cent difference). If I was treating one of Ben Johnston's scores 
as data for a MIDI rendering, and cents values were required by the 
program used, then I wouldn't have the least worry about such a 
translation -- computers won't attach any theoretical significance to 
the way the data is presented. For computers, we are concerned with 
input and output only; but composers have every right to concern 
themselves with more than this in scores for human performers. While you 
may not think so for Ben's notation, how would you react to a 
publisher's proposal to dispense with flats, double flats and sharps in 
a new edition of, say, Beethoven's piano sonatas, leaving single sharps 
only to produce the same result, on the grounds that all these 
superfluous accidentals were merely "a personalized mythology of 
meanings of relationships" (to quote you)? After all, a G#-C-D# chord 
will sound no different on the piano than an Ab-C-Eb chord, so why not 
end this proliferation of accidentals?

> Ben Johnson once wrote a piece for me for bassoon and tuba. We spent 
> so much time deciphering the notation into cents that valuable 
> rehearsal time was lost.  The piece was performed beautifully in tune, 
> but perhaps at a third too slow, or more.

Don't misunderstand me -- I have great admiration for careful performers 
of Ben's music, and I wouldn't be surprised if your performance was 
more accurate than many others which didn't involve cents translations 
during rehearsal. This still misses the theoretical point I was making: 
Ben wishes to notate the relationships to show the intervallic structure 
of the piece -- call it Platonizing if you like. He has said in public 
(perhaps someone can remind me where) that of course the expected 
accuracy of intonation will vary from one passage to another: for 
instance, the fast semiquaver runs in the 9th Quartet, with inflections 
up to the 31-limit, will never be played at tempo with painstaking 
accuracy, nor does it matter, since the notes pass by too quickly for 
any listener to notice. But since Ben chooses to notate the pitch 
relationships precisely, the acceptable margin of vagueness is a matter 
for performers to determine sensitively.

I'd be fascinated to know whether Ben participated in your rehearsals, 
and if so whether he commented on the cents translation. If he was 
there, I wouldn't expect him to have objected -- why endanger a premiere 
(and a good one at that, no doubt)? Composers have to be pragmatists at 
some point, while theorists (like me) have the luxury of following 
through all logical consequences faithfully. In this case, Ben (like 
many extended JI composer) is making a statement in his notation that 
pitch need not merely be regarded as a continuum, from which pitches are 
selected on an arbitrary, subjective basis (again this is the old 
Ptolemy vs. Aristoxenus battle).

I understand your desire that a lingua franca be settled upon for 
microtonal notation, but I offer these theoretical reflections in order 
to point out that this is only one possible priority -- those 
participating on the tuning list (or in the AFMM) don't necessarily form 
one big happy family, but perhaps, rather, opposing parties who have 
found a modus vivendi in order to pool resources. Even the word 
"microtonal" is not necessarily a label happily accepted by all working 
within JI.
 
 00:49:34 -0500
Adam B. Silverman said (Mon, 28 Oct 1996) 

> As I stand now, I think that Dan's ideas are very good; while Ben 
> gives special accidentals to 7 and higher primes, he combines 3 and 5, 
> with both using the 81/80 (+/-) diacritical.  Dan's system (an I 
> understand it) uses sharps and flats (double sharps, etc.) for an 
> ever-extensible Pythagorean chain, and applies + and - only for the .
> intervals on the 5-plane Therefore, the 5-relationship of any major 
> chord built on an uninflected pitch will be followed by a -.  I 
> haven't used Dan's notation because it wasn't very practical to study 
> with Ben and confuse him with a very similar yet different notation.  

The 3-limit default is surely the much more obvious system -- it is far 
more readily understood by musicians unfamiliar with JI, who will find 
the  complications of 5-limit default notation forbidding or even 
senseless at first. I very much doubt that Ben would have adopted a 
5-limit notation without having considered the 3-limit alternative, so 
I'm uneasy about Adam's treatment of the latter as if it were something 
new that would have "confused" Ben. Barbour, for instance, settled on a 
3-limit default without hesitation in *Tuning and Temperament*. I use a 
5-limit default for music that I consider to be 5-limit (say, Josquin); 
if I were dealing with much earlier music, I would readily switch to a 
3-limit default. Whether Ben should have retained his 5-limit notation 
after he had moved beyond the 5-limit in his own compositions is another 
question, which I think only Ben himself could answer. The alternative 
would have been to fall back to a 3-limit notation (congenial enough for 
a string quartet composer) from the 4th quartet onwards. Ben would no 
doubt object that our intuitive grasp of the major and minor scales 
falls within the 5-limit, and not the 3-limit; if this is so, then it is 
most natural to ask performers to inflect from this 5-limit default. 
(This is also intended as a reply to Daniel Wolf's points.)

>Similarly, in my string quartet, I use A+=400
> (while Ben always uses A=440)

I'm glad to hear it; as I said, this, in conjunction with C=1/1, 
inevitably results in a great many minus signs which could easily be 
avoided.

> A tricky situation (one of the thorny
> sides of this notation) is that in music that I have analyzed as 
> 5-limit (such as Lassus, Gesualdo, Palestrina, even Chopin), it can 
> drop by 7 or 8 commas in a short piece.

I've dealt with this matter in my article in mto2.6 ("Intonational 
Injustice") -- you might look at "Diatonic Ficta" by Margaret Bent 
(*Early Music History* Vol. 4) to see why a gradual descent in pitch was 
not a problem for a capella polyphony of the 15th/16th centuries (she 
doesn't deal specifically with syntonic comma shifts though, but I know 
that she is happy to include them within the scope of her arguments).

Adam, thanks for your comments on signatures, and on Partch's choice of 
intervals -- I'd very much like to discuss signatures in greater detail 
off-list in the near future.

-- 
Jonathan Walker
Queen's University Belfast
mailto:kollos@cavehill.dnet.co.uk
http://www.music.qub.ac.uk/~walker/

Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Tue, 29 Oct 1996 07:17 +0200
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA05490; Sun, 27 Oct 1996 01:19:04 +0200
Received: from eartha.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA06226
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <manuel.op.de.coul@ezh.nl> id QAA06299; Sat, 26 Oct 1996 16:19:01 -0700
Date: Sat, 26 Oct 1996 16:19:01 -0700
Message-Id: <2.2.32.19961026231649.00687914@adnc.com>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu