source file: mills2.txt
Date: Thu, 11 Jul 1996 15:25:27 -0700

Subject: Post from McLaren

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

From: mclaren
Subject: Enrique Moreno's 1995 PhD thesis
--
Enrique Moreno wrote a thesis in 1995 entitled
"Embedding Equal Pitch Spaces and the Question
of Expanded Chromas: An Experimental Approach."
This is available as Report No. STAN-M-93 from
the Stanford Unviersity Music Dept., CCRMA,
Stanford CA 94305-8180.
This dissertation is one of the most interesting
and provocative theses about microtonality to
come out of Stanford.  It stands as the equal
of Elizabeth Cohen's and Douglas Keislar's
fascinating theses (both highly recommended).
The heart of the thesis can be found on pages 50
through 52:
"We need to see that the tuning has a unique
organization, and that its intervals and chords
are, in justice, as unique as the tuning itself
may be, even when the tuning may contain
very closely approximated versions of some
familiar intervals.  The main difference comes
perhaps not so much from the intervals of the 
tunig t hemsleves but from the *context* that
the whole tuning as an entity provides for every
interval in it.  In this sense, to attempt to classify
the new intervals as variations of twelve-tone-to-
the-octave equal intervals (or of just intervals)
woudl constitute perhaps a reasonable mistake.
"It would be reasonable because it is reasonable 
to attempt to understand unknown things in terms
of the things we know, especially if there exists
a certain resemblance. It is reasonable to judge 
the world according tothe categories of our
experience, but it is not logical to assume that
our categories are the ultimate representation of
reality. (..) 
"Follwoing the same ine of thought, we realize that 
notating this tuning with the aid of  symbols that 
make reference to our usual twelve-tone-to-the-
octave tuning or to historical tunings would be
more or less absurd. Imagine having to interepret
the signs ^b, ~#, as "not so flat" and "not so sharp",
or -b+++ as "quasi-flat plus three syntonic commas,"
or whatever.  In short, regardless that some of the
intervals, chords, and even chord progressions may
resemble certain well-known intervals, chords, and
chord progression,s this tuning and many others 
(although not necessarily all) deserve a fresh 
departure point."
This is the stronget and clearest statement  I have
yet found of one extreme of the attitude toward
microtonality--namely, that we should approach
the intervals and the tunings anew and search our
their properties without preconceptions.  This is
clearly not entirely possibe--it remains a fact
that the human ear/brain system has measurable
properties and various intervals will have predictable
*sensory* effects on the auditory system--but in
making this point Enrique gets at an extremely
important truth.
Namely, that the *sensory* affect of an interval or
a tuning is not all necessarily the same as the
*musical* affect of that interval or tuning.
N0orman Cazden made much the same point in
the article "On Sensory Consonance," Int. Journ. of
Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 1980, but Cazden
was mainly concerned with demolishing Helmhotlz's
influence.  Enrique's point is much farther-reaching.
Now, the other end of the spectrum can be seen
in Easley Blackwood's and Paul Rapoport's writings
on microtonality.  "When investigating a tuning for
which there is no repertoire or tradition of any kind,
the most illuminating approach is to look for conenctions
between the new tuning and 12-note equal. All the other
tunings contain many extremely discordant intervals,
and are amenable to row music, or to other non-tonal 
compositional techniques. But hte most interesting are
those that include tonal elements--ie., major and minor
triads, and seventh chords, which may be arranged in ways
similar to, but not exactly like, 12-note equal." [Blackwood,
Easley, "Research Notes, NEH Grant RO-29376-78-0642,
1980, page 1]
Clearly this approach has a lot of problems.  For example,
Blackwood reveals fundamental bias when he states
that "major and minor triads" are his primary criteria. 
This causes him to completely overlook the neutral mode
and neutral triads on tunings like 17-TET and 21-TET,
and as a result Blackwood makes many verifiably false
statements--for example, Blackwood discusses *only*
the major and minor triads in 17-TET.  He never discusses
the neutral triad, formed from a third with 5 steps of
70.588235 cents each. Fortunately, Paul Rapoport revises
this oversight--but Paul's overall approach remains
relentlessly Pythagorean and 12-TET-based, which is
simply not appropriate, say, with melodic modes in 19-TET,
or harmonies in 21-TET, or with 9-TET or 7-TET or 10-TET
or many other tuning which cannot be jammed into the 12-TET
mold.
In 17-TET, the neutral melodic mode is an important
resource.  Blackwood completely overlooks it.  He does
not discuss 8- or 9-tone melodic modes, nor does he
discuss pentantonic modes except in 23-TET, to his
credit.
Thus the great drawback of trying to force all equal
temperaments into the conceptual framework of 12-TET
is that it leads the composer to completely overlook 
many useful (but highly non-twelvular) melodic and
harmonic resources.
On the other hand, Easley Blackwood's and Paul Rapoport's
approach to non-12 also has many advantages: by
identifying points of similarity with 12, it gives them
a place to start analyzing harmonic progressions and
melodic modes.
The great weakness of Enrique Moreno's position is that
he does not provide a conceptual framework for harmonic
progressions and melodic modes.
The basic idea of Enrique's thesis (to do it gross injustice
by boiling it down to a few words) is that non-octave
tunings can be characterized by the Nth root of K, where N and
K are integers.  In many cases, K then takes on the audible
characteristics of the 2:1 (octave) ratio in the twelve-tone
equal temperament.  Thus, Enrique contends--and has data
from psychoacoustic experiments to prove--that in many 
cases the K:1 ratio exhibits many of the properties of the
octave 2:1 ratio in 12-tone equal temperament. The particular
property on which Enrique concentrates is chroma--that is,
the property according to which a perceived pitch remains
"the same" perceptually if it is displaced up or down by
that ratio.  Thus, in 12-TET, a C4 is heard as "the same"
as a C3 and a C5; similarly, in the 12th root of 3, Enrique
claims (and has data to demonstrate) that a pitch 
displaced up or down by 3:1 also "sounds the same."
This gives a starting point for harmony in non-octave
scales, since inversions can now be analyzed, melodic
modes can be described, etc.
Enrique's approach seems especially praiseworthy because
[1] it involves psychoacoustic data, and thus has some
connection to the real world--unlike so much mental-
masturbation "modern" 12-TET music theory; [2] it has
the courage to leave behind 12-TET preconceptions.
If it seems utopian that listeners might be expected to utterly
abandon 12-TET conventions when listening to mirotonal
music, it's well to remember Heinz Werner's paper in
the 1940 Journal of Psychology, cited a few posts back.
Wener found that, given enough time to familiarize themselves
with a microtonal tunings, *every* listener he tested
was able to make the leap into hearing the new intervals
on their own terms.  
Further proof is provided by everyday experience--William
Schottstaedt, for example, has pointed out that after working
with 11-TET for an extended period, he found that 12-TET
sounded "strange" when he returned to it.
In sum, Enrique's thesis is a major contribution to microtonal
theory.  It also adventurously extends some of the conventional
notions of music theory (i.e., octave equivalence) without 
becoming a slave to 12-TET ideas.
--mclaren
 


Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 12 Jul 1996 02:44 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id RAA05905; Thu, 11 Jul 1996 17:44:46 -0700
Date: Thu, 11 Jul 1996 17:44:46 -0700
Message-Id: <960712003755_71670.2576_HHB80-5@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu