source file: mills2.txt
Date: Fri, 6 Oct 1995 11:06:52 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & psychoacoustics - post 13 of 25
---
One of the oldest of old wives' tales about the ear/brain
system is the fairy tale that the ear/brain system responds
with in some special (viz., magical) way to intervals described 
by small whole numbers.  Sometimes the supersitition is overt, 
betraying clearly its occult origins in Cabbalism, gematria,
Hindu astrology and Babylonian extispicy--as in  Zarlino's choice of 
the senario (small whole numbers less than 6) as the
basis for tuning because of the  Medieval system of number
mysticism, according to which 6 was "a perfect number" because
its prime factors add up to the number itself.
Or as in the case of Johannes Avianius' view of the 4:5:6 triad 
as "Unitrisona omnis Harmoniae," a mystical "three in one" 
musical trinity deriving its supernatural potency from 
 the Christian Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
In other cases the superstitition is gussied up with references
to Fourier analysis--the mathematics of which (as has been seen)
do not explain many properties of the ear/brain system.
Contrary to this long-running musical myth,  psychoacoustic
evidence shows that listeners hear stretched intervals as
"pure" and intervals with the small whole number ratios
 predicted by numerological theories of consonance as "too
flat" and "impure."  
The evidence is extensive:
In his 1976 thesis for the Dept. of Speech Communciation and Music 
Acoustics at the Royal Institute of Technology at Stockholm, K. Agren found 
the average size of the major second to be 199 cents; the major third 402 
cents; the purportedly "perfect" fifth 704 cents; and the octave 1204 cents.  
The standard deviation for all subjects was 14 cents for the M2nd, 9 cents 
for M3rd, P5 10 cents, and octave 10 cents.  In accord with all other 
experiments on perception of musical intervals, Agren found that subjects 
uniformly preferred *stretched* intervals on average 5-8 cents wider than 
their purportedly "natural"  counterparts.
This preference for stretched as opposed to purportedly "natural" intervals 
is not a new discovery.  The preference for stretched vertical intervals--
and for significantly *wider* melodic than vertical intervals--was 
discovered by the very first researchers who investigated the operation of 
the ear/brain system.
C. J. Delezenne, in "Memoires sur les valeurs numeriques des  notes de la 
gamme," Recueil des travaux de la Societe des  Sciences de Lille,  1826-
1827,  was the first researcher to  identify the preference for thirds wider 
than the purportedly  "natural" 5:4. Delezenne's data also showed a 
preference for stretched octaves:  "In fact, it is a daily experience that in 
climbing to the  octave from the tonic, the musical ear demands  the octave  
so strongly that in order to get away from the leading tone,  and to arrive 
more  quickly at the octave, the latter is raised  involuntarily."  Pg. 24, 
Ibid.)  Delezenne used an adjustable  monochord and gave his values in 
fractions of a Pythagorean  comma rather than in cents.  
His results are especially striking  because when starting the experiment he 
explicitly rejected the Pythagorean system, but was eventually forced to 
admit the now-universally-recognized preference for stretched intervals 
wider than the so-called "natural" intervals.  
In 1869 Cornu and Mercadier built a phonautograph, an early method of 
recording waveforms.  Mssrs. C. & M.  directed the  sound waves with a 
parabolic dish toward a membrane, which in turn engraved the waveform on 
a smoked drum of camphorated cellulose by means of a needle.  
Simultaneously an electric chronometer marked the drum the drum at 
intervals of 1 second.  By measuring the wavelength, Cornu and Mercadier 
could precisely determine pitch--as opposed to the usual wild guess about 
what pitch was actually played, or heard (the "wild guess" method is still 
used by many contemporary music theorists).  Many musicians assert on the 
basis of nothing other than some undefined extrasensory perception that 
they "can tell a Pythagorean third when they hear it," etc.  
As these experiments unmistakably prove, this is not so. 
Again, to make the point clear, categorical perception leads us to recognize 
as "perfect" or "natural" intervals which differ greatly from small-whole-
number ratios; moreover, there is at work a universal human craving for 
stretched intervals.)
The amount of evidence for human preference for stretched octaves is so 
voluminous that no digressions can be afforded.  The subject will be dealt 
with later in this series. Thus, to return to the early  scientific record: 
Cornu & Mercadier found that the mean intonation for a vertical dyad  
yielded the ratio  1.251, close to but sharper than the 5/4;   however, a 
consecutive-tone test yielded 1.2666 as the mean value.  
Notice that this shows a marked preference not only for stretched vertical 
intervals, but for even more widely stretched melodic intervals.  
The Pythagorean third is 1.256, so the experiment showed that in the 
successive intonation of 2 tones, the subjects preferred a sharped 
Pythagorean third.  Cornu and Mercadier interpreted their results to mean 
that musicians customarily use 2 different thirds for vertical and 
successive intervals, and that they also prefer intervals somewhat sharper 
than would be expected by contemporary models of human hearing. [Cornu & 
Mercadier, "Sur les intervalles musicaux," Comptes Rendus de l'Academie  
Royale des Sciences, 1869a, pp. 301-308.]
The evidence for a preference for wider-than-"rational" intervals doesn't 
end in 1869, however.  It scarcely begins there:
In 1876 Preyer found that what he called the "index of sensitivity" for the 
major thirds was 158; this corresponds to 11 cents.  So intervals as large 
as 397 cents were still identified as major thirds.  This is midway between 
the 5/4  and the 81/64 (12 cents short of the 407-cent Pythagorean major 
third). [Preyer, W. T., "Ueber die Grezen der Tonwahremung," Jena, 1876]
In 1897-8 Carl Stumpf studied both the minor third and the major third in 3 
forms: ascending, descending and simultaneous intervals. His results showed 
a marked asymmetry in the  spread of sharp vs. flat errors. For the minor 
third, the listeners  were more inclined to accept considerable flatting than 
slight  sharping.  Stumpf stated that the "point of subjective purity" shifted 
toward flat minor thirds. Analysis of data from his second experiment with 
major thirds showed exactly the opposite tendency. In this case, the point of 
subjective purity shifted to sharp thirds.  [Stumpf, C. and H. F. Meyer, 
"Massbestimmungen ueber die Reinheit consonanter Intervale," in Beitraege 
zur Akustik und Musikwissenschaft, Vol. 2, 1898]
Moran and Pratt's investigations in 1926 found an average error of 18 cents 
for the intervals of the 12-TET scale. "There is a range of about half an 
equal semitone midway between each musical interval, within which an 
interval should be recognized by D as neither of the familiar intervals, next 
above or below it."  This meant that major thirds sharped by as much as 25 
cents were still recognized by their subjects as  pure thirds. [Moran, H. and 
C. C. Pratt, "Variability of Judgements on Musical Intervals," Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, Vol. 9, 1926]
Comprehensive statistics showing a preference for melodic Ptyhagorean 
thirds  were first compiled by P.C. Greene in 1937. [Green, P.C. "Violin 
Performance with Reference to Tempered, natural and Pythagorean 
Intonation," Iowa Studies Music 4, pp. 232-251, 1937]
Bolt was the first to use pure sine waves and electronic instrumentation. In 
1947 he observed mistuned major thirds and found  the same results--
although his main interest was in spectral cues for identifying mistuned 
intervals.  [Bolt, R.H., "Masked Differential Pitch Sensitivity of the Ear  for 
Musical Intervals, " JASA, vol. 19, 1947]
In 1948 Nickerson observed the same melodic preference for widely 
stretched (viz., near-Pythagorean) thirds. [Nickerson, J.F., "A Comparison of 
Performance of the  Same Melody in Solo and in Ensemble with Reference to 
Equi-Tempered, Just, and Pythagorean Intonation," Ph.D. thesis, Univ. Minn., 
1948]
Ward studied the octave sense along with preferred values  for thirds and 
fifths starting in 1954.  
Ward's 1970 chapter in "Music Perception" lends further  support to the 
preference for wider-than-5:4 thirds, both vertically and melodically. 
Additional papers which amass evidence for this universal human preference 
include: Ward, W.D., "Music Perception," In  "Foundations of Modern  Auditory 
Theory," Ed. J. V. Tobias, 1970 see also Ward, W.D. "Subjective Musical 
Pitch," JASA, Vol. 25, 1954.]  Corso and Pikler & Harris reproduced these 
results in the late 50s-early 60s. [Corso, J.F. "Scale Position and Performed 
Musical Octaves," J. Pysch., Vol. 37, 1954; Pikler, A. G.  & J.D. Harris, 
"Measurement of the Musical Interval Sense," JASA, Vol. 33, pg. 862, 1961.]  
Pikler's article "History of Experiments on the Musical Interval Sense," 
Journal of Music Theory, 1966, pp. 55-95,  summarizes these results at 
length.
During the late 60s and throughout the 70s Johan Sundberg used computer 
analysis of recordings of live performances to determine performers' 
intonational preference.  His difficult-to-obtain report STL-QOSR- 2-3, 
Speech Transm. Lab., Stockholm 1970, "Statistical computer measurement 
of the tone-scale in played music," by Fransoon, F., Sundberg, J.  and 
Tjernlund P. is summarized in Sundberg's 1992 text as confirming 
Delezenne's, Voos', Corso's, Ward's, Lichte's,  Pikler & Harris', et al.'s 
results; Sundberg, J. "The  Science of Musical Sounds," 1992, pg. 105. 
Roederer's 1973 text quotes Ward's confirming data for Pythagorean thirds.  
Roederer ascribes the preference to Terhardt's hypothesis of universally 
stretched intervals rather than Pythagorean intonation as such.  
In 1975 Terhardt and Zick published a paper showing that  for tone 
sequences emphasizing melody over accompaniment, subjects preferred all 
intervals stretched. [Terhardt, E. & Zick, M. "Evaluation of the Tempered Tone 
Scale in Normal, Stretched and Contracted Intonation," Acustica, Vol. 32, 
1975, pp. 268-274.]
The most recent paper supporting the stretched-third preference appears to 
be Voos, "Quality Ratings of Tempered 5ths and Major 3rds," Music 
Perception, Vol. 3 No. 3, 1986.]
By this point it should be clear that the evidence for musicians  preferring 
intervals *wider* than the 81:64  as a "major third" goes back at least 125 
years.   
What about the octave?
This subject is so enormous and so important that the purported "perfect" 
octave of 2:1 will be dealt with separately in the next two posts.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 6 Oct 1995 22:52 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id NAA12599; Fri, 6 Oct 1995 13:52:09 -0700
Date: Fri, 6 Oct 1995 13:52:09 -0700
Message-Id: <009977C6B6BABBDC.42AF@ezh.nl>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu