source file: mills2.txt
Date: Thu, 19 Dec 1996 10:09:01 -0800

Subject: Post from McLaren

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

From: mclaren
Subject: sound
--
This post deals with the sound of 
xenharmonic recordings. As always,
most of you won't like these opinions--
and, as always, many of you will claim
that these statements are false, 
ignorant, untrue, delusional, etc.
As usual, this is incorrect and yet
another demonstration that most of
you have ruined your hearing by
listening to far too much rock
music or far too many concerts
of so-called serious electronic
music at far too high amplification
levels. (This proved a critical
probem at the 1992 ICMC concerts.
TA's often pumped up the volume so
loud that the entire audience cringed,
held their ears, and the speakers
distorted.)
A number of forum subscribers have
claimed that most of the music we
all hear is live, rather than 
recorded. This claim can only be
explained as the result of mental
illness or hard drug usage, since
it is so indisputably contrary to 
everyday reality. 
"The pervasive assumption that
support for new music and its
composers equals support for
performances...needs questioning.
(..) Most music is heard at home, 
via records, radio and printed
sheet music. Composers have been
getting little support for creation
or presentation of works via these
media to the many people who depend
on them." [Spiegel, Laurie, "A
Non-Performance Viewpoint," New
Music America '81 Festival program
booklet, page 49, 1981]
Since most music is heard at home
via CD, cassette or radio, this
means that the way in which microtonal 
music is recorded is *at least* as
important as the microtonal music
itself.
First and most important is the issue
of how the recording is mixed. The hard
cold fact is that you can either mix
for headphones, or for speakers--but
you can't mix for both. A mix that
sounds best when heard over headphones
is likely to sound indistinct, with
an exaggerated sound stage when heard
over speakers.  Contrariwise, a mix
that sounds best when heard over
speakers will seem too dry and too
sharp-edged when heard over headphones.
Alas, there is no way around this
dilemma. You cannot mix so that the
recorded sound is optimal on *both*
headphones and speakers. 
Unfortunately, even the most expensive
audiophile speakers sound utterly
completely 100% totally different from 
headphones. There is no sonic comparison
whatever. This becomes especially clear
when you make binaural recordings using
mikes placed about as far apart as the
ears on a human head. A 2-mike binaural
recording will sound truly startling
in its realism when heard
over headphones, but it will sound
disastrously weird when you hear it
through a pair of speakers.
Headphones isolate one ear from the other;
speakers blend the output of both channels
in the air and throughout all reflecting
surfaces in the room. 
The result?  Speakers usually tolerate far
less reverb in the mix. A subtle touch of
BBE or Aphex aural enhancement will also
greatly help the clarity of a mix
heard through speakers. Even drastic 
processing like the Carver sonic holography
process will sound acceptable. But the same
"enhancements" will produce an unpleasant
in-your-face edginess and dryness when heard 
over headphones.
Thus, you must decide which source you're
mixing for *before* you starting mastering
your CD or cassette.  Moreover, you must
stick with that decision. Nothing sounds
worse than one track of a CD optimized
for listening over speakers and another
optimized for listening over headphones.
--
The next issue is dynamic range. Headphones
take maximum advantage of a recording with
a large dynamic range, while speakers
cruelly punish a recording with vast dynamic
range. Over speakers, much of a xenharmonic
composition like William Schottstaedt's
"Water Music" is either inaudible or
ear-shattering...yet the same composition
becomes clearly audible when heard
over headphones.
A recording with large dynamic range pretty
much demands headphone listening (The
alternative is a whisper-quiet listening
environment with ultra-high-quality loudspeakers
in a place where the neighbors won't protest
jet-plane-takeoff sound levels. Very few
listeners have such a loudspeaker environment
available.).
Thus, wide dynamic-range xenharmonic recordings 
intended to be heard over loudspeakers must,
as a practical matter, employ some compression.
Unfortunately, compression always changes the
sound of a composition. This is especially
noticeable in commercial pop music, where
the maximum dynamic range is about 5 dB.
In such recordings, changes in timbre take
the place of changes in loudness, and this
may require corresponding changes in 
you orchestration of a piece of music with
a very wide dynamic range.
One salient point about compression:
it must be applied without regard for the
settings of the equipment, but with 
concern only for whether the final result
approximates the original sound of the
live recording. My experience is that 
drastic alterations are often required
to get a recording to sond like a live
performance.  Often, radical compression,
sonic enhancement, dynamic noise reduction
and gain riding are needed to produce a
recording which when heard over loudspeakers
approximates what you heard in live
performance.  Alas, loudspeakers are wildly
non-linear transducers whose measured response
curves bear no relation whatsoever to the
sound you hear.  (The reason is simple: graphs
of loudspeaker response vs. frequency give
data *only* on the magnitude of the frequency
response, *never* on phase response at that
frequency, and as Fourier's theorem tells us,
both magnitude *and* phase data are required
for a full reconstruction of the original 
signal. Equally important, loudspeaker response
is measured in an anechoic chamber using a
microphone which stays in a fixed position 
relative to the loudspeaker. In a real listening
situation, each listener will hear the loudspeaker
from a different position and in a different
sound-absorbing and sound-reflecting environment.
Thus, the graphs typically published in hi-fi
magazines are meaningless as an index of the
actual sound of a pair of loudspeakers. These
graphs are as ludicrous as a graph of the
reflectivity of 450 nm light from Rembrandt's
"The Night Watch" from a photomoter fixed 5
cm from the painting's surface as an indication 
of the overall "look" of the entire painting.)
Each loudspeaker type (acoustic reflex,
ribbon, horn, electrostatic, etc.) and
each placement and each listening position
and set of amplifiers, recorders and preamps
produces a different overall "sound." 
Using a vacuum tube amplifier as opposed to
a solid state amp will significantly change
the sound of a reproduced recording--changing the
loudspeakers from, say, Klipsch horns to 
Magnaplanar IIIDs will transform the sound of
the recording to an almost unrecognizable
extent.
This brings up the issue of boom boxes. 
Although it seems wildly insane, it remains
a fact that most of your prosepctive audience
will listen to the output of 50,000 dollar
computer music workstations or tens of thousands
of dollars of handcrafted xenharmonic instruments
or a roomful of microtonal synthesizers over 40 dollar
boom boxes. This is a development so weird
as to border on the psychotic, yet it
remains unquestionably true. Because of
the rush-rush-rush nature of our society,
most people listen to xenharmonic music
either on a boom box or in their car.
The best way to mix for this kind of
peculiar playback situation is on a
set of satellite loudspeakers with small
cheap tweeters and the subwoofer EQ'd
nearly off. This reproduces the extremely
poor frequency response and dynamic range
of the average boom box/car stereo.
A piece of microtonal music mixed for
boom box or car stereo playback must be
compressed to about 20 dB dynamic range.
Notice that this is not "20 dB of reduction
in dynamic range," I mean that the entire
range of the composition must be compressed
to fit within the 20 dB of useful dynamic
range available on the average cassette
deck. This means that if you start with
a composition which uses a dynamic range
of 96 dB in 16-bit linear DAT format, you
will have to compress the output of the
DAT recording by at least 76 dB since
(as we all know) most cassette decks
produce garbage output if the recording
level falls below -20 dB. Typical compressors
useful for most musical material include 
the dbx 163x series.
This kind of bizarrely extreme 76 dB
compression will produce a large number of
unfortunate artifacts which cannot, alas,
be avoided.  The alternative is to refuse
to mix for cassette deck playback, which
means that your recording will (to most
people, whose hearing has been destroyed
by excessive volume levels and who seem
perfectly happy with the exercrable 
sound reproduction afforded by a boom
box/car stereo) sound too reverberant,
indistinct or "muddy," and inaudible
throughout much of its length.
--
The next issue to bear in mind when 
recording xenharmonic music is that
computer music requires an entirely
different mixing technique than 
live music. Computer music typically
uses sine waves or other kinds
of synthetic tones that cut through 
a listener's head like a knife;
typical recording levels for a
xenharmonic piece of computer music
should be at least 20 dB lower than
for live music. This is a classic
case of the Fletcher-Munson curve
at work, and when mixing computer
music you should always ignore
the meter levels.  Instead, play
back a live piece periodically
to get a general loudness comparison
and set the levels with complete
disregard for the meter readings.
--
Lastly, there remains the issue of Dolby
encoding. As Dolby Labs has admitted,
the Dolby decoding circuits of most
cassette decks are badly miscalibrated
at the factory, or simply left uncalibrated
entirely. If you doubt this, ask yourself:
when was the last time you saw an audio
techician or a sound man with a Dolby B
calibration tape?
Try: "never."
As a result, the poorly calibrated Dolby B
decoding circuits in most cassette decks
turn Dolby encoded recordings into mush.
When poorly adjusted, Dolby B acts as a
drastic low-pass filter.  And since
virtually all cassette decks use 
uncalibrated or misadjusted Dolby B
encoding/decoding circuitry, this means
that the best solution is always to
*AVOID* Dolby encoding.
Dolby C works well if the same cassette
deck is used to play back the tape as
was used for recording. Otherwise,
Dolby C produces wretched artifacts.
In effect Dolby C is so cassette-deck-
specific as to prove useless in the real
world.  
Dolby Spectral encoding is an excellent
method of noise reduction which, alas,
is featured on almost no casette decks
because the fools at Dolby Labs overpriced
the technology outrageously on its 
introduction. When DAT arrived, it proved
far cheaper than adding Dolby S to existing
30 ips reel machines, and so Dolby S never
caught on. Yet another example of "how
not to introduce new technology."
--
Because Dolby encoding (even when adjusted
with a factory-authorized calibration tape)
inevitably produces many unacceptable 
artifacts in the source material during
playback, some hiss will be evident in all
your recordings (since any sane person will
avoid Dolby encoding like the plague). This
means that it's vital to push the levels
of the recording as high as they'll go during 
cassette dubbing so as to minimize noise
during playback.
In my experience, the most important element
in a cassette dubbing chain is the source
quality--preferably DAT--and after that, the 
cassette deck. This means that you will get far
more bang out of your bucks by spending them
on a good cassette deck than on a ton of
signal enhancement gear.
It remains a fact, alas, that Nakamichi still
makes the best cassette decks around. Avoid
the high-end Nakamichi decks and buy the
cheapest new model available. The high-end
Nakamichi cassette decks do such a freakishly
good job of reproducing the execrable audio
signal on the crappy cassette format that a 
Nakamichi Dragon (for example) will delude
you into EQ'ing the high end of your recording
down much lower than it should be.
The best way to test your recording is to
make the copy on a Nakamichi deck and play it
back on a crappy K-Mart boom box, since this 
is the way virtually everyone will listen to
your recordings.  Such grotesquely poor
quality playback will quickly bring to light
any EQ or reverb problems with the master
recording--generally you'll have to EQ
the high end up or add considerable amounts
of BBE or Aphex enhancement to make up for
the fact that the average boom box has
less bandwidth that a typical telephone.
The analog compact cassette might not be
the world's lowest-fidelity recording
medium; it's possible that Edison wax
cylinder recordings sounded worse. However,
this question remains open. It is possible
that the analog copmact cassette does actually
the worst possible audio fidelity of any
recording medium ever invented.
Regardless of the outcome of that issue,
it remains an obscene and outrageous fact
that we will reach the 21st century with
most people listening to microtonal music
on ultra-lo-fi analog audio cassettes
with lots of hiss, plenty of wow and
flutter, and enormous amount of distortion.
Thus it behooves us all to produce the best
possible cassette recordings of microtonal music...
a task akin to producing the best possible
buggy whips we can make. Insane, senseless,
bizarre, and outlandish--yet incontrovertibly
necessary given the utter failure of DAT,
MiniDisc or DCC to survive in the consumer
marketplace as affordable viable mass
recording/playback formats.
--mclaren


Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Thu, 19 Dec 1996 19:20 +0100
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA08559; Thu, 19 Dec 1996 19:22:23 +0100
Received: from eartha.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA08879
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <manuel.op.de.coul@ezh.nl> id KAA24978; Thu, 19 Dec 1996 10:22:20 -0800
Date: Thu, 19 Dec 1996 10:22:20 -0800
Message-Id: <v01510101aedec1e9a491@[134.173.37.15]>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu