source file: m1588.txt
Date: Sat, 21 Nov 1998 10:42:18 EST

Subject: harmonization of songs on piano

From: Ascend11@aol.com

There were three posts responding to my speculation 
regarding what I had taken to have been a positive 
response of a community of indians in North Dakota to the 
musical efforts of the missionary who had brought 
the piano.  There is first the matter of what, in fact were the 
true feelings of those indians.  Bill Alvez took the 
view, which I still share, that their reaction was positive.  
On the other hand Neil Haverstick suggested that 
the missionary had mistaken their loud drumming for an 
enthusiastic response while actually they had not 
liked the sound of his piano playing and were drumming so 
loudly not out of musical inspiration whetted by 
the missionary's work, but rather to drown out sounds which 
they were finding most disagreeable and didn't want to hear.  
Judith Conrad, who wrote what seemed to be a somewhat 
detailed account, indicated that it was her 
assumption that the indians were trying to drown out the 
awful sound of the missionary's piano playing. 

	My post was a pure speculation as I had not known anything 
of the missionary's account before reading 
her post.  It could be that there are other indications in the 
book of the missionary's insensitivity to how 
others were reacting, etc. which would support the 
interpretation that the indians really didn't appreciate 
the missionary's efforts. 

	Judith wrote: "He would have the native singers sing him 
their favorite songs, and then he would figure out how to 
'harmonise them properly'".  It would seem to me that this 
process would have required some time 
and effort on the part both of the singers and of the 
missionary.  Thinking about it, I would imagine that 
the missionary and the singers would have spent some time 
together and that the missionary would have tried 
out his arrangements of their songs with the singers who 
were instructing him in how the songs went.  Is it not 
possible that the conflicts which lay ahead had not yet grown 
to the point where they would have marred their 
spirit of cooperation?  I could imagine the missionary's hosts 
seeming to be more enthusiastic about their 
mutual efforts than they actually were, and the missionary 
coming away with such an impression, but their 
trying to drown out sounds which they detested seems very 
unlikely to me, although from this distance it's 
difficult to be sure. 

	But supposing the harmonizing of their traditional songs 
actually was something which most of them 
really found delightful?  It seems to me that this is possible.  
Played on a piano in harmony, their songs would 
in one way remain the very familiar songs which they had 
liked so much, and yet there would be something radically 
new about them inasmuch as they were harmonized.  This is 
the way I believe I might react.  

	Craig Grady had written: "...This music is gone for the most 
part or greatly corrupted by 12 et etc." 
I believe it's probable that the missionary's piano was tuned 
to mean tone temperament.  I have to say that I 
believe music played on such a piano would have had a far 
greater and more positive impact on people hearing 
it for the first time than would "the same" music played on a 
piano tuned to equal temperament.  Many will disagree.  We 
can't know full details regarding the reactions of people who 
lived long ago, but research into 
the matter can be done.  Personally, when I started hearing 
music on a piano in mean tone temperament and just 
intonation after having heard virtually nothing but equal 
tempered piano all my life, I thought it was something 
wonderful.  Just hearing that kind of a piano made me feel 
like getting up and starting to sing and dance.  I found it hard 
to believe that a piano, of all musical instruments, could 
sound so beautiful.  I have found quite a few who react 
similarly to the way I do.  Many do not.  But I am not the only 
one who feels that this piano sounds pretty terrific, and 
maybe quite a few of those with whom the missionary worked 
did, too.