source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sun, 8 Oct 1995 08:12:29 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & psychoacoustics - post 15 of 25
---
MYTH:"In any given range of pitch the comparative consonance of an interval 
is determined by the relative frequency of the wave  period in the sounding 
of the interval." [Harry Partch, "Genesis of a Music,"  2nd. Ed., pg. 151.]
FACT: "Systematic measurements show that people tend to find that an 
interval traditionally classified as "consonant" sounds  progressively 
dissonant the farther down in the bass it is  played...In the very low bass, 
even the octave sounds dissonant!" [Johan Sundberg, "The Science of Musical 
Sounds," pg. 73.] 
"Even the *order* in which two instruments define a musical interval is 
relevant.  For instance, if a clarinet and a violin sound a major third, with 
the clarinet playing the lower note, the first dissonant pair of harmonics 
will be the 7th harmonicof  the clarinet with the 6th harmonic of the violin 
(because only  odd harmonics of the clarinet are present).  This interval 
sounds smooth.  If, on the other hand, the clarinet is playing the upper tone, 
the 3rd harmonic of the latter will collide with the 4th harmonic of the 
violin tone, and the interval will sound  `harsh.'" [Roederer, J., "Introduction 
to The Physics and  Psychophysics of Music," 1973, pg. 143.]
In his 3-part article, "Some Aspects of Perception," Shackford reveals how 
widely so-called "perfect" intervals can deviate when performed by trained 
symphony-caliber performers from major orchestras--yet these intervals 
are still heard as "perfect." Because Shackford's measurements offer such 
remarkable proof of the ear/brain's categorical perception mechanism at 
work, the article deserves an extended quote:
"Mean Values (MV) and quartile deviations (QD) of interval sizes measured in 
a string trio [composed of members of the New York Philharmonic] as 
compared with just, equally tempered and Pythagorean tunings (J,ET and P):
--------------------------------------
          Dyads           
Interval  	MV (cents)  QD (cents)
Major 2nd    204              197-211
minor 3rd    305              287-318
Major 3rd    410              402-418
Fifth        	707              699-714
---------------------------------------
          Melodic           
Interval  	MV (cents)  QD (cents)
Minor 2nd     93               86-101
Major 2nd     204             199-209
Fourth           501             408-510
Fifth             701             692-708
---------------------------------------
[Shackford, "Some Aspects of Perceptions," Journ. Mus. Theory, Vol. 6, 1961]
"Fifths and twelfths are shown in Examples 17 and 18; and then a statistical 
analysis of the sizes of these intervals in performance is represented in 
Example 19. The spread of 50 cents, a quarter tone, between the largest and 
smallest fifths played is surprisingly large for the interval that is supposed 
to be the most sensitive to inaccuracies of intonation." [Shackford, C. "Some 
Aspects of Perception - I," Journ. Mus. Theory, Vol. 6, 1961, pg. 185]
"Thirds and tenths are shown in Example 20 and are then analyzed in 
Example 21. Major thirds and tenths have about the same spread [50 cents] 
but the median and mean is larger for thirds. (...)  As with fifths, long-held 
thirds and tenths show a narrower spread than those used in passing. Though 
sizes approaching the "natural" value of 386 cents were used, the 
Pythagorean interval of 408 cents appears to be the most representative of 
actual practice." [Shackford, C., "Some Aspects of Perception - I," Journ. Mus. 
Theory, Vol. 6, 1961, pg. 189]
"For barbershop quartets, a Major 3rd of 403 cents was preferred, while a 
fourth of 493 cents and a fifths of 705 cents was preferred." [Sundberg, J. 
"The Science of Musical Sounds," 1992, pg. 100]
"It is quite remarkable that musicians seem to prefer too wide or 'stretched' 
invervals in many cases. Above we have seen several examples of interval 
stretching: the barbershop singers' fifth and just minor seventh; string trio 
players' melodic  major and minor thirds and fifths; music listeners 
preferred sizes of fifth and octave; and a professional musician's settings 
of melodic intervals that contain  ascending fifths. In the case of octaves, 
the craving for stretching has been noticed for both dyads and melodic 
intervals. The amount of stretching preferred depends on the mid frequency 
of the interval, among other things. The average for synthetic, vibrato-free 
octave tones has been found to be about 15 cents. Thus, subjects found a 
just octave too flat but an octave of 1215 cents just. (...) A German 
acoustician, Ernst Terhardt, developed an interesting theory that proposes 
an explanation for why  we are so eager to stretch octaves. He departed 
from the fact that the pitch of a sine tone is changed if another sine tone 
starts to sound simuntaneously. The net result is that both tones push the 
pitch of the other tone away from its own pitch to increase the distance 
between the two. In this way, the pitch interval between the first partials 
in a harmonic stpectrum becomes a bit stretched. (...) Terhardt believes that 
this stretched octave follows us from cradle to casketand that is is this 
octave that musicians model when they play." [Sundberg, J. "The Science of 
Musical Sounds," 1992, pp. 103-105]
Additional papers which adduce evidence for the universal preference for 
stretched octaves include Terhardt, E., "Pitch, Consonance and harmony," 
JASA, Vol. 55, 1970, pg. 410. He didn't cite Terhardt, E., "On the perception 
of periodic sound fluctuations (roughness)." Acustica, Voll. 30, 1974, pg. 
201. Nor does he cite Terhardt, E. and Zick, M., "Evaluation of the Tempered 
Tone Scale in Normal, Stretched and Contracted Intonation," Acustica, Vol. 
32, 1975, pp. 269-276, in which Terhardt points out: "Therefore it must be 
concluded that even just or Pythagorean intoantion cannot be considered as 
ideal. Rather, optimum intonation of a diatonic scale probably depends on 
the structure of the actual sound in the same manner as has been previously 
discussed with respect to tempered pianos." [Terhardt, E. and Zick, M., op 
cit.]
Terhardt goes on to conclude: "It is remarkable, however, that stretched 
intonation is distinctly preferred to contracted intonation. Probably, the 
pitch interval established by the simultaneous complex tones fits better 
with the mentally stored octave interval in stretched intonation than in 
contracted intonation.  This is well in line with the psychoacoustic 
phenomenon of octave enlargement." [Terhardt, E. and Zick, M. , op cit.]
Various musicians who find these results inconvenient have claimed that 
the preference for stretched intervals occurs not because Western 
musicians "prefer" non-just sharp intervals, but because they learn to play 
them; a wealth of evidence disproves this claim.  
In "Octave adjustment by non-western musicians," Edward M. Burns 
states "The results were essentially the same as found with Western
 musicians, that is, small intrasubject variability, large intersubject
 variability, and a small but statistically signficant frequency-dependent
 "stretch" of the physical octave when adjusting the subjective octave. 
(...) As suggested by Terhardt, they do seem to rule out the explanation 
that this stretched is learned from the "stretched" tuning of the piano 
to which Western musicians are universally exposed. This stretched 
tuning of the piano is due to certain physical characteristics of the 
piano strings and is not found in most instruments to which the Indian
 musicians are exposed." [Burns. E. M, op cit., Session M: Musical acoustics,
 88th meeting of the  Acoustical Society of America; in JASA, vol. 56,
 Supplement, pg. S 26]
In the same session, Burns' paper "In Search of the Shruti," cites evidence 
from Indian musicians confirming "earlier experiments [which] indicate 
that the phenomenon of "categorical perception" is present in the 
perception  of musical intervals." [Burns, op cit, in JASA, Vol. 56, Supplement, pg. S 26]
This explains why various just intonation fans hear the perceptually 
non-octave 2:1 ratio as being a "pure" octave while listeners not indoctrinated by constant exposure to just intonation accurately
perceive the distorted 2:1 ratio  as smaller than the perceptual octave.
  Exactly the same effect is at work among Javanese musicians who 
hear many different gamelan as being tuned to "pelog" even though "the majority of large Balinese gamelan are tuned with five pitches to the octave, having some intervals larger than others, in a general pattern 
that has come to be called pelog: but no two gamelan have exactly the 
same pattern of intervallic structure.  This is not for want of skill.  
It is because the tuning pattern has been composed." [Erickson, Robert,  "Timbre and the Tuning of the Balinese Gamelan," Soundings, pg. 98, 1984]
Categorical perception also explains why equal tempered intervals are 
accepted with such equanimity by listeners; a wide variety of different 
intervals are perceived as "thirds" and "fifths" and "fourths" and "sixths" 
in an actual musical peformance setting:  a psychological mechanism is 
at work whereby listeners unconsiously process the sounds they hear 
and fit unfamiliar intervals into familiar categories.  Listeners 
literally *hear what they expect to hear*--regardless of what is 
*actually played.* 
More evidence for this phenomenon comes from "Categorical Perception--
Phenomenon or epiphenomenon: Evidence from experiments in the perception 
of melodic musical intervals," Burns, E. M. and Ward, W.D., JASA vol. 63, No. 
2, Feb. 1978, pg. 456.
"In marked contrast to the extreme accuracy of musical-interval judgments 
in the experimental situations cited above is the large variability found in 
measurements of intonation in musical performance.  The results of several 
studies on intonation in performance of western classical music have been 
summarized by Ward (1970). They show large variations in the tuning of 
individual intervals (ranges of almost a semitone) in a given performance.  
Similar variability has been found in measurements of intonation in 
nonclassical western music (Stauffer, 1954; Fransson, Sundberg and 
Tjernland, 1970; Owens, 1974) and in nonwestern music (Jhairazbhoy and 
Stone, 1963; Callow and Shepherd, 1972; Spector, 1966).  Of course this 
large variability is not in itself surprising since variability in production of 
tones is involved. The important point, however, is that in the above-cited 
studies, all listeners, including the performing musicians, agreed that the 
compositions were performed correctly and the large variability in 
intontion was not detected. 
"This apparent inability to detect large variations in interval size in certain 
situations suggests that a phenomenon associated with the perception of 
speech tokens, "categorical perception," may be involved." [Burns, E., and 
Ward, W.D., "Categorical Perception--Phenomenon or epiphenomenon: 
Evidence from experiments in the perception of melodic musical intervals," 
JASA vol. 63, No. 2, Feb. 1978, pg. 456.]
Again, in "Categorical Perception of Musical Intervals," Burns and Ward point 
out "A body of evidence indicates that certain speech units are perceived in 
in a special mode called `categorical perception,' the characteristics of 
which are (1) the existence of well-defined identification functions and (2) 
the ability to predict precisely the discrimination functions from the 
identification functions, based on the  assumption that the subjects can 
discriminate two stimuli better than they can differentially identify them.  
(...) A study of the perception of musical intervals by experienced musicians 
was performed using the procedures associated with categorical perception 
experiments;...the results show that the musicians exhibit categorical 
perception, some to a degree approaching that shown in the perception of 
stop consonants." [Burns, E. and Ward W., "Categorical Preception of Musical 
Intervals," JASA, Vol. 55, No. 2, Feb. 1974]
The powerful evidence for categorical perception in listeners and 
performers alike lends equal support to just, equal-tempered and non-just 
non-equal-tempered  tunings.  Because listeners unwittingly brainwash 
themselves to hear the intervals they expect regardless of what intervals 
are actually performed,  all three tunings should prove equally acceptable to 
listeners.
Of course there is more evidence for a difference between the stretched
intervals heard as "pure" and the perceptually-distorted intervals
characterized by small whole numbers, and universally heard as
"too narrow" and "flat."  The next post will examine some more
of this enormous body of evidence.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Sun, 8 Oct 1995 20:46 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id LAA28440; Sun, 8 Oct 1995 11:45:50 -0700
Date: Sun, 8 Oct 1995 11:45:50 -0700
Message-Id: <951008184423_71670.2576_HHB28-1@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu