source file: mills2.txt


Subject: Post from McLaren

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

From: mclaren
Subject:  Yet another overlooked (but remarkable)
  article on microtonality
--
The Journal of Psychology is not a place you'd 
usually think of looking for articles about
xenharmonic music--especially perceptive early
articles which foreshadow many later developments.
But, as it turns out, one such article was published
in Vol. 10, 1940, J. Psych., pp. 149-156, author
Heinz Werner.
The title is "Musical 'Micro-Scales' and 'Micro-
Melodies.'"
In this remarkable article, Werner discusses 
what was later to become known as categorical
perception (though in 1940 it did not have that
name).  Werner points out that "A subject, when
presented with a arelatively small interval of--let 
us say--0.12 of a semitone, at first may hear a
very slight indefinite difference between the two
tones, or even no difference at all.  But when the
same interval is repeated a great many times with 
the subject deliberately focussing his attention on
the task of discerning a clear-cut interval, there 
will almost invariably be reported an apparent
enlargement of the objectively constant interval.
UIsual;ly there is a maximum in this subjective
augmentation: *the maximum is reached
when this small interval has acquired the subjective
character of a semi-tone.*  The time necessary
for the attainment of this maximum increase varies
greatly with the individual, but so far not one 
individual has been encountered who did not hear
the semi-tone-like quality after more or less
repetition." [Werner, H., "Musical 'Micro-Scales'
and 'Micro-Melodies,'" J. Pych., Vol. 10, 1940,
pp. 149-150]
In this paper Werner goes on to describe a set
of experiments in meldoic recognition performed
with intervals of "less than one-sixth of a 
normal semi-tone (16.5 cents)."
Werner foudn a number of fascinating effects: 
one which he called "the law of increasing 
stabilization" mandated athat "if the subject should
be presented with an ascending-descending interval, 
he will at first perceive the ascending phase as
subjectively larger than the one which descends."
Werner also found audible apradoxes--for example,
because the melodic patterns used tended to 
acquire a gestalt quality of their own as well
as the effect caused by the pitch of the individual
notes "this leads to a paradoxical statement
frequently made by the [subjects] that even though
Tones 1 and 2 remain constant in character, 
nevertheless the interval separating these tones 
may audibly vary in size.  All this seems to prove
that it is not the position of the tones which is of
primary important and which creates the quality of
the interval. It would seem that it is the quality of 
the interval which determines the position of the
tones in the micro-system." 
Yet another fascinating effect was observed when 
Werner played the ubjects a straight chromatic 
cmirotonal scale versus a melody: "When the scale 
such was given chromatically, i.e., step by step, 
none of these subjects, providing that there were
completely ' in the system,' found any distinction
between te micro-scale and the normal piano scale. 
Indivudal differences came to the fore when the
micro-melodies were compared to patterns of the
normal scale. Two of the subjects felt sure
that no difference existed.  One observed expressed 
the feeling that it was as if she were sitting in a
puppet theater. 'If one keeps on looking at the puppets,
after a while they acquire the full siz eof human
beings!' The other two subjects felt a certain 
difference." 
This is a fascinating and to my knowledge one of the
only *subjective* records of naive observers' 
reactionsn to microtonal melodies.  (By "naive" I
mean test subjects who weren't committed
microtonalists). 
Moreover, Werner found that microtonal melodies
were perceived with considerable consistency
by the subjects, once they'd become used to hearing
them.  Observers could make reliable judgments
about whether two halves of micro-melody "fit"
together, or whether a melody formed an
antepenultimate closure leading to a cadence,
or whether the melody was perceived as
"empty" or not because it used primarily
members of the harmonic series.
Carol Krumhansl has done a great deal of work
with the "probe tone" method of studying
melodic perception.  Comparing her work to
Heinz Werner's, however, it seems to me that
Krumhansl's assumptions are crucially flawed.
For one thing, she assumed that when an observer
hears a 12-TET melody with one note missing
and then a series of notes off by  various twelfths
of a semitone, the observer willr eact according
to an innate sense of "tonality," rather than 
according ot how s/he has been programmed by
a lifetime of listening to 12-TET.  
Second, Krumhansl assumes implicitly that no
systematic distinction can be made by test
subjects between one "mistuned" (tuned off
the target 12-TET note by some number of
twelfths of a semitone) note and another.
But Heinz Werner's article proves this is
clearly not so--and our own experience 
indicates very clearly that observers can 
easily be trained to hear intervals as small
(in my case, anyway_ as 1/100 of an octave.
In fact Jonathan Glasier reliably tuned Pep
Estavane's Harmonry Harp by ear to 1/100
of an octave intervals per string: he had no
trouble hearing a distinct difference twixt
adjacent tones, and he was reliably able
to detect which strings approximated members
of the harmonic series and which did not.
Third, Krumhansl seems to assume that 
observers cannot tell whether the probe tone
is bouncing around between different circles
of fifths (each 1/12 of a semitone or 1/72
of an octave belongs to *different* circle
of fifths--and there are *six* different and
entirely incompatible circles of fifths in the
72-tone equal-tempered scale).
But my own experience indicates that this
assumption is probably untrue--and Werner's 
evidence supports this contention strongly.
If Werner's subjects were able to hear 
difrferences in the implied harmonies of
one 36-TET scale versus another, would 
not Krumhansl's test subjects have made
similar judgments about one 72-TET scale
step versus another?
In short, Heinz Werner's article seems to me
a model of its kind.  It is amazing that this
article has almost never been cited in the
microtonal literature.  It blazes many new
trails and foreshadows quite a few later
developments.  In particular, Werner's 
briliant idea of giving test subjects *months*
the get used to hearing micro-melodies 
completely revolutionized test procedures
for microtonal melodies.
It is in fact shocking that psychoacoutic
and music psychology experiments continue
to be done today using micro-meldoies, but
*without* giving the subjects adequate time
to overcome the inevitable effects of 
categorical perception which are known to
apply to any naive listener who hears an
entirely different tuning for the first time.
Heinz Werner's paper did not seem to garner
any attention...it appears to have dropped
into the sea of psychological literature and
vanished.
Yet it would fascinating to follow up on
Werner's experiments today, using modern
equipment, and do a second series of
experiments pushing further along the
lines Werner laid out. In paritcular it
would extremely interesting to compare
subject reactions to micro-harmonies
a well as micro-melodies, after a suitable
period of acclimitization by the 
listeners.
This is a truly remarkable paper, and one 
which every microtonalist would do well
to study.
Incidentally, there is one other paper by
Heinz Werner I've been able to track down--
"Uber Mikromeloik und Mikroharmonik," in
Zeitschrift f"ur Psychologie, 1926, pp. 
74-128.  This probably explains the depth
and breadth of Werner's later paper.  Clearly
he cut his teeth on microtonality in the 
European quartertone movement of the 20s,
then came to America as a refugee before
or during WW II.
It's a shame he never published anything else,
so far as I can tell.  Werner was clearly a
first-rate mind, and an amazingly astute
thinker on the perception of microtonal
intervals.
--mclaren