source file: mills2.txt
Date: Tue, 3 Dec 1996 12:47:56 -0800

Subject: From Brian McLaren

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

From: mclaren
Subject: Paul Erlich's "tonalness"
 algorithm, the purported "central
 pitch processor," etc. - 1 of 2
--
In Topic 3 of Digest 848 Paul Erlich
made some provocative general remarks about
psychoacoustics.  "The central pitch 
processor is the mechanism by which we
perceive a set of harmonic partials as
a signle note -- the virtual pitch -- with
an associated pitch. (..) Whether this process
is inborn or acquired, some claim prenatally,
is a matter of debate. Its existence is
not."
Erlich's meaning is not entirely clear. He
might be saying that the existence of
the central pitch processor is not open to
debate.  If so, he confutes the *process* of
pitch perception with the *hypothesis*
of a purported  "central pitch
processor."  In this case his claim
is naturally false.
The existence of some centralized high-level
mechanism of pitch detection far inside the
brain has been demonstrated pretty conclusively.
Houtsma and Goldstein conducted a series of
experiments in which they showed that any
of a set of the first 10 harmonics produced a
virtual pitch even when each of a pair of those
first 10 harmonics was presented dichotically
(this is, one to each ear).  
Since there was no opportunity for those
two tones to interact except in the brain,
some higher-level mechanism of pitch
perception must have been at work for
thos tones.
If this is what Paul Erlich means when
he says "there can be no doubt" about
the existence of a central pitch processor,
he is surely correct.
However, if what Paul E. means is that
"there can be no doubt of the existence
of Goldstein's postulated mechanism of
central processor pitch detection," alas,
this is incorrect.
While there is no doubt about the
reality of the *observed effect*  (virtual
pitch) there's strong doubt as to the hypothesized
cause (Goldstein's specific "central processor")
which might or might not exist in the human
auditory system. In fact, Goldstein's and Wightman's
theories are outmoded and have been supplanted
by spectral network theories of pitch perception
based on wetware neural nets.  Paul Erlich does
not mention the latest spectral network models
of pitch perception because he might not have
the space to do so in his posts...or he might be unfamiliar
with the full range of psychoacoustic literature.  
Regardless, Erlich appears to have  based his discussion 
and his posts on a small subset of the psychoacoustic 
literature dating from the 1970s-early 1980s, some of
which is outdated.  As it happens, there is strong
evidence against Wightman's and Goldstein's specific
"central processor" models, but Erlich does not
mention it. This might be because Erlich may 
be entirely conversant with the all the aspects
of the psychoacoustic literature dealing with
inharmonic tones.
When Erlich states "there can be no debate" about
this or that hypothetical auditory mechanism,
he is not talking about psychoacoustics.
*Almost all* aspects of modern psychoacoustics
are subject to debate because most of the evidence
is contradictory.  Some experiments strongly
support certain hypotheses about how the ear/brain
system works, while other psychoacoustic
experiments strongly support *other* hypotheses.
Some of the evidence contradicts *all* available
hypotheses.
Worst of all, the human ear/brain system is pretty
much a black box.  We can't saw open someone's skull
and start slicing out brain tissue and zapping the
poor subject with electrical impulses because that
would be unethical.  It might tell us a good deal about
the precise wetware mechanisms which allow us to
extract pitch, but at present we can only view the
human brain as a sealed system and we can't muck
around punching in wires and burning out parts of the
brain to see what effect this has.  As a result, 
psychoacoustics is more like astronomy than 
acoustics: in astronomy you can look but you can't 
touch.  It's impossible for an astronomer to arrange
for galaxies to collide to  see what happens--
the best you can do is try to find two galaxies that
probably collided and figure out what might have
happened.  The same is true in the human auditory
system--deaf subjects and stroke victims have
provided some of the most useful info about ear/brain
wetware.
This observation is nothing new. It's an old truism.  
James Clerk Maxwell pointed out in his Rede Lecture 
in 1878 that what we would now call
psychoacoustics is "that untrodden wild between
acoustics and music, that Serbonian bog where 
whole armies of scientific musicians and musical
men of science have sunk without filling it up."
Unlike so many earlier microtonal theorists, 
Paul Erlich knows some hard facts about psychoacoustics,
and he has clearly gone to the trouble of looking up
some of the actual literature.  This is important, 
because (and I'm speaking to the rest of you) you *must*
read the full text of the original papers to understand
the full range of ambiguity of psychoacoustic results,
and the full complexity of the human auditory system.
However, Paul Erlich may rely to an unwarrented degree
on the theories of a few researchers--Terhardt,
Wightman, and Goldstein--whose theories conflict
with the results a number of important psychoacoustic 
experiments. 
Terhardt has gained plenty of attention and a hefty
rep by performing a lot of experiments which back
up his mathematical place-theory model of human
hearing.  This is fine as far as it goes, but the problem
is that Terhardt has *not* bothered to mention the
not-so-negligible  evidence which casts *doubt* on
his place theory of hearing.
In Terhardt's theory, the primary action of the human
auditory system is  Fourier analysis of
incoming sounds into sinusoids on the basilar 
membrane of the inner ear.  Other effects--such as
virtual pitch--are considered by Terhardt to
constitute "secondary sensations" derived from
the primary Fourier analysis.
What are the problems with this theory?
First, Terhardt's mathematical model gives predictions
which conflict with a signifcant amount of psychoacoustic 
data.
For one thing, Terhardt's theory stumbles on the
minor triad, as Richard Parncutt has pointed out.
For another thing:
 In "Hearing A Mistuned Harmonic In An
Otherwise Periodic Complex Tone," William
Morris Hartmann, Stephen McAdams and Bennett
K. Smith point out that "The predictions of the
algorithm, calculated from the formulas
given in Terhardt et al. (1982), are shown in Fig.
14.  The figure shows predictions for -4% and
+4% mistuning; the predictions for other values
of mistuning actually used in our experiments lie
ebtween the curves for -4% and +4%.  The algorithm
predicts a shift for zero mistuning (harmonic 
complex), approximately midway between curves for
-4%R and +4%, although Peters et al. (1983) did not
find such shifts.
"Comparing the predicted shifts with the observed
shifts shows that he algorithm correctly predicts
the trends of the data when the mistuning is positive.
When te mistuning is negative, however, the algorithm
fails completely. Experimentally, negative mistuning
usually leads to negative pitch shifts.  By contrast,
the algorithm predicts positive pitch shifts for negative
mistuning. (..)  The fact that [Terhardt's] algorithm fails 
so badly for negative mistuning suggests that there is
something quite wrong with the idea that pitch shifts
are mainly determined by partial masking." [Hartmann,
W. M., McAdamas, S., and Smith, B. K., "Hearing a Mistuned
Harmonic In An Otherwise Periodic Complex Tone,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 88, No. 4, 1990, pg. 1722]
--
Partial masking is at the center of Terhardt's theory,
and these data strike a serious blow at partial
masking in pitch perception.  Paul Erlich does not mention
this because he may not be aware of it: his grasp of
the psychoacoustic literature might be incomplete, or
perhaps he simply didn't space in his post.
(For the other experiment in which Terhardt's
theory failed to accurately predict results, see
"Pitch of Components of a Complex Tone," Peters,
R. W., Moore, B. C. J., and Glasberg, B.R., Journal of 
the Acoustical Soc. Am., Vol. 73, 1983, pp. 924-929.)
So not only does Terhardt's theory fail several basic
psychoacoustic experiments  badly, the entire
theory of virtual pitch as a secondary effect
derived from the operation of the basilar membrane
ignores a significant body of evidence pointing to
the operation of temporal mechanisms of pitch
perception and timbral resolution, as well as
a large amount of evidence *against* the place
theory throughout much of the musical range.
--
Why, for instance, doesn't the ear seem to use
basilar membrane information to detect pitch
below about 500 Herz?
David M. Green pointed out in 1970 that "Pairs of
waveforms having identical energy spectra were
generated using a technique developed by Huffman.
A pair of such waveform differ only in their
phase spectra.  The discriminability of such
waveforms was measured under various 
conditions.  (..) The results of these experiments
suggest that the ear can discriminate differences
in temporal order as small as 2.5 msec." [Green,
D. M. and Patterson J. H.,  "Discrimination of Transient 
Signals Having Identical Energy Spectra,"  J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., Vol. 48, No. 4, pp. 894-905]
If the ear can reliably discriminate between a waveform
and its inverse, clearly the ear is not in that frequency
range operating according to spectral analysis--since
a waveform and its inverse have exactly identical
Fourier magnitude spectra.  See Pierce, J.R., "The
Science of Musical Sound," 2nd ed., 1992, pg. 149.
See also "Tone Segregation by Phase: On the Phase
Sensitivity of the Single Ear," Kubovy and Jordan,
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 66, No. 1, 1979, pp. 100-
106.  
As Kubovy and Jordan point out, "This tone-segregation
by phase raises doubts concerning several current
theories of pitch perception. (..) Insofar as these
results support temporal fine-structure theories
of pitch perception, they are incompatible with
the theories of pitch perception we cited
at the beginning of this paper (Goldstein, 1973;
Terhardt, 1973; Wightman 1973b)." [op cit., pp. 102-3]
Notice that Kubovy and Martin*specifically* identify
Terhardt's, Wightman's and Goldstein's models
(the latter 2 are papers which conjecture the
existence of a "central pitch processor") as
*incompatible* with their experimental results.
Other embarrassing problems include an unwonted
sensivity to the phase of high harmonics in
determining the virtual pitch of the tone complex.
According to Terhardt's theory, the ear/brains system
should ignore phase, but in fact phase is vitally
important to determining fundamental pitch below
500 Hz and above about 5000 Hz.
--
John R. Pierce points out in "Periodicity and Pitch
Perception" that "Investigations of just noticeable
differences (jnd's) of pitch continue to indicate the
plausibility of two 'pitch mechanisms,' the first
operating on resolved harmonics, and the second
'periodicity pitch' mechanism on unresolved
clusters of harmonics (Houtsma and Smurzynski, 1990)
as discussed earlier by de Boer (1976). (..)
"The shape of the curve of jnd versus pulse rate suggests
a transition between two mechanisms between 62.5
and 500 pulses per second. 
"Such a transition is supported by experiments on 
matches between periodic all-positive pulses and
periodic patterns of positive and negative pulses,
carried out by Flanagan and Guttman (1960), Guttman 
et al. (1964), and Rosenberg (1966). At low frequencies
the match is on pulse rate; at higher frequencies the '
match is on fundamental frequency." [Pierce, J. R., 
"Periodicity and Pitch Perception," J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., 90 (4), October 1991, pg. 1989]
The failure of the ear's Fourier analysis below
500 Hz to account for observed pitch perception
is a long-standing weakness of place theories of
hearing, and Terhardt's theory does not solve
this problem.  Terhardt's paper never mention
or explain the results of Gutman & Newman's
1960 experiments, but they're also crucial because
they also provide hard evidence for periodicity 
mechanisms of pitch perception.
One of the most serious problems for a theory
of place-type pitch perception like Terhart's
(in which periodicity mechanisms of pitch
perception are conjured away) is that while central
processor models are forced on us by the finding that
dichotic harmonics 3, 4 and 5 are most important to
virtual pitch (Ritsma, R. J., "Frequencies Dominant in the
Perception of the Pitch of Complex Sounds," J. Acoust. 
Soc. Am., Vol. 42, 1967, pp. 191-198;  also Plomp, R.,
"Pitch of Complx Tones, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 41,
 1967, pp. 1526-1533) and particularly the finding
by Houtsma and Goldstein (1972) that 2 successive
simultaneous harmonics with frequencies nf[o] and
(n+1)f[o] are presented to different ears they evoke
a fundamental pitch percept equally as effect as
a monotic or diotic presentation of the same two
harmonics, *nonetheless* phase is crucially important
to the perception of pitch below 500Hz and above
5000 Hz.  Whenever phase becomes crucial in
pitch perception, by definition the mechanism
must be temporal and not spectral.
Moreover, in an intriguing experiment in which "the
perception of musical pitch was investigated in 
postlinguistically deaf subjects with cochlear implants,"
the pure periodicity theory of hearing received a shot
in the arm.  "Within a range of low pulse rates, subjects
defined the intervals mediated by electrical pulse
rate by the same ratios which govern musical intervals
of tonal frequencies in normal-hearing listeners.
It may be concluded that tempral cues are sufficient
for the mediation of musical pitch, at least for
the lower half of the range of fundamental frequencies
commonly used in music." [Pijl, S., and Schwartz, D. W. F.,
"Melody Recognition and Musical Interval Perception by
Deaf Subjects Stimulated with Electrical Pulse Trains
Through Single Cochlear Implant Electrodes," J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., 98(2), August 1995, pg. 886]
This provides strong evidence in favor of a strictly
temporal mechanism of pitch perception at frequencies
below about 500 Hz and at least a plausible mechanism
for temporal explanations of consonance throughout
the auditory range (though there are also problems
with purely temporal models of pitch perception above
5 khz--nerve-coding theories shouldn't work at frequencies
that high because the volley rate has topped out!)  As
I mentioned, there is a lot of data for *and against*
ALL the proposed models of pitch perception.
As of 1993, most references on psychoacoustics considered
UNRESOLVED the question of whether place or periodicity 
mechanisms are primary in the human ear/brain system.
 Despite Paul Erlich's emphasis on the theories of Terhardt,
Goldstein and Wightman, there's vigorous & ongoing & unresolved
debate between place theories of pitch perception like
Terhardt's *and* temporal periodicity theories of pitch
perception, *and* combination theories which seek to
combine elements of both. "Several theories have been
proposed to account for residue pitch. Theories prior 
to 1980 may be divided into two broad classes. The first,
spectral theories, propose that the perception of the
pitch of a complex involves [Fourier analysis followed
by] a pattern recognizer which determines the pitch
of the complex from the frequencies of the unresolved
components (Goldstein 1973; Terhardt 1974). (..)
"The alternative, temporal theories, assume that pitch
is based on the time pattern of the waveform at a 
point on the basilar membrane responding to the higher
harmonics.  (..) For these theories, the upper unresolved
harmonics should determine the pitch that is heard.
"Some recent theories (spectro-temporal theories)
assume that both frequency analysis and time-pattern
analysis are involved in pitch perception (Moore 1982,
1989; Srulovicz and Goldstein 1983; Patterson 1987;
Yost and Sheft, Chapter 6." [Yost, William A., Arthur N.
Popper and Richard R. Fay, "Human Psychophysics," 
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1993, pg. 98]
The references for these more recent spectro-temporal
theories of pitch perception are:
Moore, B.C.J., "An Introduction to the Psychology of
Hearing," 2nd Ed., London: Academic Press, 1982.
Moore, B.C.J., ditto, 3rd edition, 1989.
Srulovicz, P. and J. L. Goldstein, "A central spectrum
model: A synthesis of auditory-nerve timing
and place cues in monaural communication of 
frequency spectrum," J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol.
73, pp. 1266-1276, 1983
Patterson, R.D., "A pulse ribbon model of monaural
phase perception," J. ACoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 82, pp.
1560-1586, 1987
Hall, J. W., Haggard, M.P., and Fernandes, M. A., 
"Detection in noise by spectro-temporal pattern
analysis," J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 76, No. 1, July
1984, pp. 50-56
Cohen, M. A., Grossberg, S., and Wyse, L. L., "A 
Spectral Network Model of Pitch Perception,"
 J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,  Vol. 98, No. 2, August 1995, 
pp. 862-879.
--Notice that J. L. Goldstein is the same author
Erlich quotes in the earlier "central processor"
paper of 1973.  Goldstein cooked up his subsequent
spectro-temporal theory to patch the glaring holes
in his 1973 central processor theory--namely,
its complete inability to explain experiments like
those summarized in David M. Green's 1970 paper.
--mclaren


Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Tue, 3 Dec 1996 23:21 +0100
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA16009; Tue, 3 Dec 1996 23:23:18 +0100
Received: from eartha.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA16092
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <manuel.op.de.coul@ezh.nl> id OAA11879; Tue, 3 Dec 1996 14:23:15 -0800
Date: Tue, 3 Dec 1996 14:23:15 -0800
Message-Id: <v02130505aeca545da6b8@[192.168.11.203]>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu