source file: mills2.txt
Date: Mon, 24 Mar 1997 18:10:39 -0800

Subject: Organizing fields, 1

From: "Jo A. Hainline" <hainline@unr.edu>

Following is a rather haphazard bibliography on articles and books on
material relating to what I termed a few days ago as "organizing fields". 
I am also quoting a rather lengthy article which I believe in a nutshell
outlines the fundamental theory on this topic.  If it gets too long I'll
split it into 2 posts. 

Becker, R. O. (1963). The effect of magnetic fields upon the central
nervous system. Medical Electronics and Biological Engineering, 1,
293-303. 

Becker, R. O. (1972). Electromagnetic forces and life processes.
Technology Review, Dec. 

Becker, R. O. & Seldon, G.  (1985). The body electric. New York: William
Morrow. 

Burr, H. S. (1972). Blueprint for immortality: The electric patterns of
life. London: Neville Spearman, Ltd. 

Burr, H. S. & Northrop, F. S. (1935). The electrodynamic theory of life.
Quarterly Review of Biology, 10, 322-333. 

Miller, R. A., Webb, B. & Dickson, D. (1975). A holographic concept of
reality. Psychoenergetic Systems, 1. Seattle: University of Washington,
Dept. of Paraphysics and Parapsychology. 

Murr, L. E. (?). Physiological stimulation of plants using delayed and
regulated electric field environments. International Journal pf
Biometereology, 10, 2. 

Savoy, G. (1977). Project x: The search for the secrets of immortality.
New York: The Bobbs-Merrill Company, Inc. 

Yang, J. M. (1989). The root of chinese chi kung: The secrets of chi kung
training. Jamaica Plain, MA: YMAA Publication Center. 

Yang, J. M. (1989). Muscle/tendon changing and marrow/brain washing chi
kung: The secret of youth. Jamaica Plain, MA: YMAA Publication Center. 

Following is a quote from Gene Savoy's book, Project X: The Search for the
Secrets of Immortality (1977). 

 "...To date we have detected three radiant energy fields surrounding the
physical organism.  The first is very near the skin and appears to be a
dark color (its true color is a flourescent red).  The second extends
about three inches from the body; the third extends, on the average, six
inches from the body.  The first field is simply the radiation of body
heat, i.e., infrared.  The second and third fields are the inner and outer
edges, respectively, of eight distinct energy fields oscillating within
this mixed range.  The prodominant color of the edge closest to the body
and of the outer edge have been observed to change continually as one
force cen ter (and therefore the color field of that particular center)
dominates the others.

This color phenomenon is characterized by the continual change in dominant
color brought about by the person turning towards different points of the
compass or moving to different geographic locations.  Thus no single color
dominates the total field for a ny great length of time.  In general, the
energy field around the human organism appears violet or bluish, but
fluctuates for various reasons. 

Individual energy fields may be discerned at various parts of the
organism, such as the hands, elbows, shoulders, breasts, hips, knees,
feet.  Diseased areas give off distinctly separate radiation, usually in
the form of infrared.  It is interesting to no te that the human physical
organism is composed of chemicals, predominantly water, held together in a
state that is more representative of a liquid than of a solid. 

The energy fields enveloping the physical organism may be, not the product
of the body's chemical components, but rather seperate electromagnetic
bodies with INDEPENDENT NERVOUS SYSTEMS that react to radiation.  This
relationship would make the human orga nism as much an electrical as a
chemical phenomenon.  Therefore, we can no longer regard the physical
chemical organism as more "real" than the non-physical electric organism. 
On the contrary, we must in fact consider the visible or physical organism
as secondary to the invisible electromagnetic or cosmic/solar organism. 
(Here is strong support for the old metaphysical view that the human
complex is more electric than chemical, more "spiritual" than physical.) 
There is every reason to believe that the energy fields are the source of
life and may have the potential of surviving the death of the physical
organism.  The metaphysical question of immortality is bound up with these
fields. 

Man is a photo-complex.  Photosensitization of the energy fields and the
ionization of the physical organism through the irradiation od sunlight
has certain therapeutic benefits.  The net result is an expanded state of
being through development of the psy chic attributes.  Metabolism is
regulated by the endocrine glands, which control the chemical processes
governing the generation of new cells and the destruction of old ones.  To
a high degree the endocrines are responsible for the continual health,
youth fulness, long life, and states of behavior of the organism.  While
traditional science adequately describes the process of metabolism and the
function of the endocrines, we must accept the possibility that these
glands are governed by forces outside the human organism: solar rythms. 

States of health, youthfulness and longevity may be governed by built-in
clock systems determined by factors inherited from our parents; however,
the ability of an individual to alter endocrine regulation through certain
techniques is something new and unsuspected. 

Although the fields are interrelated with the physical organism, they are
representative of a more refined cosmic body which requires
electromagnetic (not chemical) nourishment directly from the source of all
life, the sun.  The energy fields, I suspect, would therefore affect the
biophysical organism."(pp164-166) 

This is getting long enough for now.  I realize this is a bit off topic
but would be glad to post more if there is interest.  Dr. Yang
Jwing-Ming's books, noted above in the bibliography, address the
traditional chinese take on this field, which is quite extensive and
deep, the basis of accupuncture and Taoist concepts of longevity and
immortality, etc.

Bruce Kanzelmeyer



Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Tue, 25 Mar 1997 03:51 +0100
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA14331; Tue, 25 Mar 1997 03:51:15 +0100
Received: from ella.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA14338
Received: from  by ella.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	 id SAA18046; Mon, 24 Mar 1997 18:49:33 -0800
Date: Mon, 24 Mar 1997 18:49:33 -0800
Message-Id: <199703242146_MC2-133A-C1C4@compuserve.com>
Errors-To: madole@mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@ella.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@ella.mills.edu