source file: mills2.txt
Date: Wed, 8 Nov 1995 16:18:10 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Rhythm, tuning & the extension of Charles
  Seeger's 1930 article into n-j n-e-t scales
---
"Look within.  Let neither the peculiar quality of
anything nor its value escape you."  [Marcus Aurelius,
"Meditations"]
With typical insight, Ivor Darreg once commented that
the rhythms of Baroque music arose from the 18th-century
love of clockwork and chronometry.  And in fact one
of the greatest achievements of Enlightment technology
was the development of a ship's chronometer capable of
keeping sufficiently accurate time to allow Royal Navy
ship to navigate along lines of longitude. The inventor won
a 10,000-pound prize--at the time a huge fortune.
In a larger sense, the infrastructure of music (the tuning) has
probably always exerted a potent influence over its overt
superstructure--specifically, over the rhythms used.  
It's only in the last century, however, that the relationship
appears to have been restored to the approximate level
of complexity characteristic of the music of the late 14th
century.
Just intonation music naturally lends itself to a 
complementary arrangement of ratios of small integer 
numbers of beats.  Ben Johnston pioneered this idea in 
the rhythms of his quartets.  Thus a 4:3 will often 
be mirrored with 4 beats against 3, a 6:5 with 6
beats against five, and so on. Toby Twining picked 
this procedure up from Johnston, and employs it in
his own just intonation choral compositions: the
polyrythms consistently mirror on a larger time-scale
the vibrational ratios produced at the waveform level.
This is not a new idea.  The masters of ars subtilitas
in the 1380s played with this idea extensively and
with great subtlety: and in the 1920s Leon Theremin 
implemented it with his now-lost instrument "the
rhythmicon."  Theremin's instrument responded to 
the presence of dancers in a space (sensed by 
changes in capacitance as detected by 3 sensors) 
and produced polyrhythms accompanied by just 
intonation ratios.  As it turns out, just intonation
intervals are very much easier to generate with
analog electronic circuits than equal-tempered 
intervals.  So Theremin's rhythmicon was 
an early JI synthesizer as well as an interesting
example of very early integration between rhythm
and tuning.
In this century the massive strip-mining and 
subsequent exhaustion of the 12-tone equal-
tempered tuning appears to have led to an
increasing dissatisfaction with chronometric
18th-century rhythms.  Thus the history of avant
garde music in the 20th century is a history of 
ever less regular rhythm.  First 3 against 4...
most famously in the section of "Rite of Spring"
where the conductor is supposed to conduct 3
beats with one hand and 4 beats in the other.
Then, onward and upward to other beat-ratios.
"As tonally in 900, so rhythmically in 1900,
the relations 2:3 and 3:4 represented the 
ultimate in harmonic comprehensibility." 
[Seeger, Charles, "On Dissonant Counterpoint,"
Modern Music, Vol. 7, No. 4, 1930, pp. 25-31]
Copland's 1924 piano concerto  and
Gershwin's Rhapsody in Blue from the same
period both use extensive syncopation and 
hemiolas.  Elliott Carter's metric modulation
procedures extended the irregularity of the
basic pulse, as did Bartok's essentially barline-
less compositions, ditto Varese's "Density 21.5,"
"Arcana," "Ionisation," etc.--in many cases 
using a new key signature every
barline.  The real break came when Khaikosru
Shapurji Sorabji introduced multiple embedded
n-tuplets during the 30s and 40s, and when
Nancarrow started stretching the tempi
of multiple polyphonic lines by different
rates simultaneously.  You get multiple
simultaneous tempo-shift curves going on
that deform time in a completely plastic
way: rhythmic regularity has completely
disappeared.  The basic pulse is continuously
changing even within the individual note.
This has led to rhythmic complexities
like those of Michael Gordon's "Yo, Shakespeare!",
or Trimpin's, computer-controlled vorsetzer works,
 or Warren Burt's "I Have My Standards"
and "Notes From the Jungle of Intonational 
Complexity."  
It seems likely that the reason for this
increasing irregularity and complexity in
rhythm is that composers simply beat the
12-tone equal tempered scale to death. 
By the 9th century A.D. they had introduced 
the third as a consonance, by the 18th
century they'd started using sixths  as 
consonant intervals, by the 1920s and 1930s
the major and minor 2nd and major and
minor 7ths as part of the spectrum of
consonance.  Schoenberg's "emancipation
of the dissonance" effectively placed all
intervals on a continuous scale--there
were no longer any "forbidden" intervals.
Everything could be a consonance, depending
on context--and the "rules" of consonance and
dissonance could be turned upside-down, if 
desired.  Charles Seeger's "dissonant counterpoint,"
introduced in 1916, was a typical example:
"Dissonant Counterpoint...is essentially an
inverted species counterpoint, the species of 
the older discipline remaining intact but
*dissonance* (seconds, tritones, sevenths,
ninths) becoming the norm and *consonance*
(thirds, fourths, fifths, sixths, octaves)
requiring preparation and resolution." [Nelson,
Mark, "In Pursuit of Charles Seeger's Heterophonic
Ideal: Three Palindromic Works by Ruth Crawford,"
Musical Quarterly, Vol. 72, No. 4, 1986, pg. 459.]
The above prescription is a blueprint for 
post-Webern modernism up to the late 1970s:
and indeed, the exhortations of Kyle Gann's
music professors to "use more good solid 
20th century intervals--tritones, minor
seconds, major sevenths," is of course nothing
but standard Palestrina species counterpoint
turned inside out: the "good" intervals of the
1500s have become the "bad" intervals of the
1920s-1970s, and vice versa.  Modernism did
not expand the language of music, of course:
there were no new intervals introduced.  The
list of preferred intervals had merely been
swapped for the list of intervals formerly
proscribed. Thus,  by the 1930s there was nothing
left to do with harmony or melody in the 12-tone equal
tempered system.  The harmonic resources
had been played out.  The 12-tone tuning had been
strip-mined, leaving a hole in the ground and an
enormous amount of bad wannabe-Webern.
That left rhythm.
So, starting circa 1948,  composers began to explore 
ever more complex, ever more irregular divisions of
the beat.
More than one commentator has suggested that
Nancarrow represents some kind of "ultima
thule" for rhythmic complexity in this progression
toward ever more complex time-relationships.
However,  this is obviously incorrect.
One of the most interesting frontiers in xenharmonic
composition is, in fact, the extension of rhythm
in accord with the tuning of non-just non-equal-
tempered scales.  This is nothing more than a self-
evident expansion of Charles Seeger's 1930
suggestion  of "a recognition of rhythmic harmony
as a category on a par with tonal harmony." [Seeger,
Charles, "On Dissonant Counterpoint," Modern Music,
Vol. 7, No. 2, 1930, pp. 25-31.]  (Since this is an
obvious extension of Seeger's classic modernist
insight, naturally no academic has yet suggested
it. Score another one for the same no-talent PhDs who
barred the greatest tape music composer of the
20th century from the Columbia-Princeton Electronic
Music Center because of his "lack of credentials"--
the composer being, of course, Tod Dockstader.)
As we've seen, just intonation compositions naturally
lend themselves to small integer ratios of beats (as
Johnston, Twining, Partch, et al., have skilfully shown).
Indeed, Kenneth Gaburo produced a composition, "Lemon Drops,"
using a bank of sine wave oscillators at the U. of Illinois,
which uses the same principle of moving micro-ratios
on the waveform level into macro-ratios on the level
of time of the individual measure. (Circa 1972?)
And, as we've seen, equal tempered compositions appear
to lend themselves  to much more complex 
divisions of the beat: embedded n-tuplets, metric
modulation, and so on.  On the macro-level of
the individual measure this is very similar to approximating 
an irrational number with two large rationals. If
you've heard a complex rhythm like 7 in the time of
4 inside 11 in the time of 9 inside 3 in the time of 2
inside 17 in the time of 13, you realize that the end
result is a set of timings that sound nearly like
ratios of irrational numbers--above a sufficient
level of embedded n-tuplets, no underlying pulse is
audible at all.  This is obviously akin (on the macro-level)
to the ratio of irrational numbers on the micro-level of
the individual waveform which defines an equal-tempered
scale, in which all pitches are some Nth root of K.
By analogy, the next step in rhythmic complexity is
self-evident:  move to ratios of transcendental numbers
on the macro-level of the beat, mirroring the non-just
non-equal-tempered pitches of n-j n-e-t scales.
Our present system of notating music has no way of
dealing with such divisions of the beat.  They are really
impossible to notate with anything like conventional
musical notation.                                5       11   17
While regular pulses like cut time or  8  or  8  +  8  can
be easily notated, and even very complex ratios made up of
embedded n-tuplets *can* be written down in conventional
notation, the kind of rhythmic pulsations I'm talking
about here lie completely outside the range of Western
notation.  The system just breaks down.  Conventional
notation can't handle these rhythms *at all.*
Let me give an example, so you can get an idea of what
I'm talking about here:
At a tempo of 60 each quarter note lasts exactly one
second.  So common time (4/4) produce measures
lasting 4 seconds, with each quarter note lasting one second,
each eighth note last 1/2 second, each 16th note lasting
1/4 second...and so on.  A triplet 8th note would use 3
8th in the time of 2, so each 8th note would last 1/3 second.
This is a simple extension of micro-ratios at the
waveform level into macro-ratios at the level of the beat.
A more complex embedded tuplet might require, say,
a measure in 4/4 to have 11 eighths in the time of 8 eighths,
with 5 in the time of 4 inside it, with 3 in the
time of 2 inside that.  If we had a measure like this:
4  |-------- 11:8------------------------------------------|
4  |----5 : 4---------------------| 8th 8th 8th 8th 8th 8th 8th
     8th 8th 8th |----3:2--------|
                         8th  8th  8th
Working from the outside in, the divisions of the beat are:
 
the last 7 8th notes have a duration of 8/11 of 1/2  second =
8/22  of a second;  the first 3 8th notes have a duration of
4/5 of that, or 4/5*8/22 = 40/110 or 20/55 of a second,
and the 3 eight note sof hte inenrmost n-tuplet have a 
duration of 2/3 that, or 40/165 of a second.  This is 
number complex enough that any underlying pulse (if
audible) is quite obscure and irergular-sounding.  Again,
a reasonable analogy to the irrational Nth root of K 
ratios of equal-tempered pitches.
However, moving on to non-just non-equal-tempered
tuning produces a new level of rhythmic complexity,
when the individual scale pitches are projected
upwards into the macro-level of the individual measure.
A typical n-j n-e-t scale is one of the subset of tunings
produced by taking ratios of inifnite continued fractions.
The fraction N1 +  N2
                           ___ 
 		        N3 +
      			   __
			   N4 + 
			       __
			       N5 + ...
in general produces numbers which are neither simple 
integers nor Nth roots of K.   For example, if N1...NJ
= 1, the result is 1.61803399, or phi (the Golden Ratio).
By using a very simple computer program (3 lines)
to evaluate such a continued fraction out to, say,
N20, it's easy to calculate the frequencies of
such scale-steps to an accuracy of 7 figures.
The first 5 infinite continued fractions for
N1...NJ = 1 through 5 are:
 
f1 = 1.618034
f2 = 2.414213
f3 = 3.302775
f4 = 4.236067
f5 = 5.192582
f6 = 6.162277
 
If we let f0 = 1.0, this gives 6 scale-steps.  Now,
notice that these ratios when expressed as rhythms
*cannot be notated in any conventional way.*
There is just no reasonable method of writing
down a rhythmic system in which the longest
note lasts 1.0, the next longest note last 1/1.618034,
the next longest note lasts 1/2.414213, the next
longest note lasts 1/3.302775, and so on.  The
concept is totally alien to anything in our
notational convention.  
These kinds of rhythms just blow Western notation
right out of the water.   In fact, not only can we
not *write music* that *notates* such divisions
of the measure, at present we cannot even *talk*
about such divisions of the measure with a 
comprehensible vocabulary.  We do not even have
the *words* to begin a discussion of such temporal
divisions.  We are, literally, mute.  
Why does this matter?
It matters because one of the clearest and simplest
compositional strategies involving non-just non-equal-
tempered scales is to work with such rhythms on
the level of the individual measure, then in blocks of
phrases which last for times proportional to these
ratios, then in sections of the work which last for
times also proportional to these ratios on a larger
time-scale.  This continues traditional musical practice
in a sensible and straightforward way: namely, by
systematically extending  the micro-level
of frequencies up into the macro-level of the beat.
In such a non-just non-equal-tempered composition,
all timbres could (using Csound) easily be made up of
additive sets of freuqnecies described by a non-just
non-equal-tempered tuning, and all the durations
of the notes *also* described by the same
ratios, along with durations of sections, movements,
etc.
However!
Trying to keep track of the rhythms is mind-bending
and maddening.  Because of the total inadequacy of
notational systems or even vocabulary, I have been
forced to notate these rhythms as delta start times:
that is, note durations--which must then be
added to the absolute run time (as demanded by
Csound).  It's *incredibly* meticulous, and requires
a *great deal* of bothersome calculation.
Interestingly, the rhythms sound jazzy and almost
improvisational.  They are not conventional.  And
in particular, when two or more strata of such rhythms
are going at once, made of notes broken down
into subvalues of these infinite continued fraction
convergents, with each note-stream at a tempo
also described by the an infinite continued fraction,
the results are truly exotic.
Next post, some suggestions for a generalized
rhythmic vocabulary that would at least allow
an approach to coherent manipulation of time-
streams and durations derived from non-just
non-equal-tempered tunings.
--mclaren 

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Thu, 9 Nov 1995 06:50 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id UAA26952; Wed, 8 Nov 1995 20:50:30 -0800
Date: Wed, 8 Nov 1995 20:50:30 -0800
Message-Id: <951109043956_71670.2576_HHB32-6@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu