source file: mills2.txt
Date: Fri, 30 May 1997 21:53:36 +0200

Subject: modes

From: Daniel Wolf <DJWOLF_MATERIAL@compuserve.com>

Gordon Collins wrote:

''Daniel Wolf sees modes in certain patterns of harmonization. ''

This is not so. Rather: I hear particular patterns of harmonization as a
consequence of melodic modes. As Bill Alves says, Major and minor are modes
of the common diatonic collection just as well as any others. Their
historical prominence in the common practice era - as opposed to the
prominence of other modes in other eras - is attributable to the particular
suitability of the intervallic arrangement to harmonizations which can
project the first degree of the major scale as a tonic over the duration of
a piece. This is a fairly Schekerian statement, but as I noted in earlierpostings, I am also quite open to simultaneous interpretations of a work
where local melodic behavior is suggestive of other modes - a ''Raga
Malaka'' interpretation. Please note that my definition here is based upon
major to allow for the characteristic ambiguity of the minor, which pivots
between its own distinctive modal identity and one based upon the parallel
major scale with chromatic modifications.   The difficulty represented by this misunderstanding is similar to the
problem that mid-Rennaisance theorists in had dealing with the definitionof modes when not all voices in a polyphonic setting started or ended on
the final of the mode. Just because the thickened texture allowed for
chords with more pitches, doesn't mean that a piece whose bass is in d
dorian will have an alto in f lydian when the alto starts and ends on f. A
close study of that alto voice will probably reveal motion that is
uncharacteristic of a lydian melody. Counterpoint did indeed change the
modes, but the distinctiveness of the modes was determinative in how
actually counterpoint functioned.

In the common practice era, the rise of Major and minor corresponded
generally with the substitution of transposition for modulation (in the
sense of changing the melodic mode) as a means of generating tonal variety
over the duration of a piece, with the melodic contrast between minor andMajor leading to two distinct ways of coloring harmonic progressions thatwere functionally identical. This was accompanied by a general change in
the texture, towards a more homophonic arrangement of the voices, or rather
one in which the inner voices were decidedly subservient to the outer. The
striking cross relationships in Bach chorale harmonizations are one example
of this. The net result is that although the material resources of these
modes at the local level of a piece were not substantially different fromthose of earlier musics, the experience was quite distinct.

What, however, does this have directly do with tuning? I am afraid that the
more I ponder the music of the common practice era, the closer I come to
concluding that ''tonal music'' was composed with increasing disregard for
precise tuning. And the increasingly indistinct tuning was used to
represent or imply an increasingly broad harmonic language with unlimitedtransposition. Twelve tone and serial musics may even be worse off; a good
friend of mine recalls visting the studios of many composers in the fifties
- Boulez, Stockhausen, Nono among them - and all of them had out-of-tune
pianos. The first broadcast of the complete _Lulu_ featured intermissionswith George Perle playing analytical examples on an instrument where almost
every pitch had vibrato due to mistuned strings. In contrast, older musicis terribly sensitive to tuning. Simply playing dorian as d to d' on a just
major C scale won't work due to the comma shy fifth d - a; in pythagoreanthe opposite is often the case due to the ditone above the tonic,
resolution to which is demanded by the diminished fifth b - f. (A
discussion of the benefits and disadvantages of out-of-tuneness might be
worthwhile for this list...).

As to the general question of the survival of other modes in the tonal era:
Sibelius's _Seventh_, or any of Debussy's lydian works should be sufficient
- if late - counter-examples to the thesis that modal writing just stopped.

I wish to acknowlege that Harry Powers - author of the New Grove article on
''Mode and Melodic Type'' - greatly influenced my thinking on these issues
during his guest professorship at my graduate school. My definition of key
does differ from his but does so by going to a fairly radical reduction (a
group of seven consecutive members from a chain of fifths, with chromaticsubstitutions in the minor borrowed from the parallel Major). I find thisdefinition will be true for a wider repertoire than that defined in Groveand also one that is closer to the practices of notating and keyboarding,which are certainly signs and symptoms of the conceptual framework
underlying the system.  Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 30 May 1997 21:56 +0200
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA05200; Fri, 30 May 1997 21:56:04 +0200
Date: Fri, 30 May 1997 21:56:04 +0200
Received: from ella.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA05202
Received: (qmail 636 invoked from network); 30 May 1997 18:49:24 -0000
Received: from localhost (HELO ella.mills.edu) (127.0.0.1)
  by localhost with SMTP; 30 May 1997 18:49:24 -0000
Message-Id: <199705301437_MC2-178E-6CF2@compuserve.com>
Errors-To: madole@mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu