source file: m1483.txt
Date: Fri, 24 Jul 1998 07:37:05 -0500

Subject: Re: Overtones and Tone Color

From: Gary Morrison <mr88cet@texas.net>

> Are overtones different frequencies
> produced by different aspects of whatever materials are producing the sound?

   The materials vibrating a significant factor, but the most important factor
is the shapes and available kinds of movements possible in that configuration.
The most important thing about a string, for example, is that its diameter is
only a tiny fraction of its length, that it is anchored firmly at both fret and
bridge ends, and that it is made of a flexible material.

   This is what allows it to vibrate at very nearly precisely-harmonic
frequencies.  What makes those frequencies not completely harmonic are the
departures from this idealized model of a string, such as the fact that high
piano strings' are so short and thick, and under such high tension, that they
are no longer a close approximation to being arbitrarily flexible and infinitely
longer than their diameter.

   As another example, the most acoustically-significant difference between a
clarinet and a saxophone is that the saxophone's bore is conical, meaning that
the diameter of the tube is much narrower at the mouthpiece end than at the bell
end.  Except for the bell at the end of the horn (which has a lot less
acoustical significance than it would initially seem), the clarinet's bore is
much closer to cylindrical (i.e., nearly equal diameter throughout).

   The combination of a cylindrical bore and a reed produces stronger
odd-numbered harmonics than even ones, whereas, a saxophone (as well as other
conical-bored instruments like the oboe, bassoon, or most brasses), have about
the same prominence of even and odd harmonics.

   Now in the case of wind instruments, it's very critical to understand what
the "materials" are.  What vibrates in a wind instrument is the air inside the
tube.  The walls of the instrument itself vibrate only slightly, except in a
mere handful of specific cases (quadruple-forte, unstopped F.horn, for
example).  That is obviously completely the opposite for a stringed instrument -
the soundboard is the entire means of transferring the sound generated by the
strings to the air, so the soundboard imparts its vibrational qualities to the
sound of the instrument.

   That is NOT to say that the material a wind instrument is made of has
absolutely NO effect upon its timbre, but that is a much less significant factor
than its forcing means (e.g., reed, edge, lip-buzzing) and its bore geometry.
No matter what material you make a flute out of, it's always going to sound more
like a traditional flute than like a bassoon.