source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sun, 4 Feb 1996 10:47:46 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: miscellany
---
Congratulations to Steven M. Miller, Harold Fortuin,
Matthew Puzan, Enrique Moreno and Neil Haverstick. 
Even after a month, Neil's amazing MicroStock continues 
to reverberate in the form of the recordings of the
concert.  A first-rate event.  Utterly superb!  
Way to go, Neil.
Steven M. Miller deserves kudos for reaching outside of 
academia to solicit tapes for the U. of Santa Fe's upcoming
electronic music concert series.  In so doing, he discovered
a remarkable fact: some of the best music out there is
being done by ordinary schmucks with NO university
affiliation, NO resources, and NO predelection for
elaborate mathematics.
Congrats also to Harold Fortuin both for building a
xenharmonic generalized MIDI keyboard (see the Huyghens-
Fokkers 1994 Yearbook for more info). Any chance of
commercializing the widget?  
Good idea also to offer to exchange copies of your
music. 
All too few forum subscribers seem to be interested
in making and sharing MUSIC, as opposed to words
about numbers about theories about words about
numbers about...
Especially praiseworthy: the scholarly labors of
Mssrs. Moreno and Puzan, whose theses promise a
comprehensive survey of xenharmonic incunabula.
Speaking of which--
Several articles touching on xenharmonics have
recently been published.  Of particular interest
is Contemporary Music Review, Vol. 10, 1994.
The issue is *entirely* devoted to "composition
with timbre."   As we all know, composing with
timbre is the gateway to non-12..  Thus this issue
is of inherent promise to xenharmonists.
Also of interest: "Musical Scales In Central Africa 
and Java: Modelling by Synthesis," by Frederic Voisin,
Leonardo Music Journal, Vol. 4, 1994, pp. 85-90.
Voisin describes the results of a series of 
experiments in which indigenous tuning experts
were allowed to tune up their own scales on
a DX7II: the process was recorded with a MIDI
sequencer, and the researchers returned after
several days in each case and asked the same
tuning expert to evaluate the tuning again (so
as to confirm the reliability of the results).
When the DX7II was tuned correctly, the researchers
report that the tuning expert and a group of
bystanders would spontaneously perform a piece
from their repertory.  
This methodology sounds like a significant advance
in ethnomusicology.  It's orders of magnitude
beyond the relatively useless previous practice
of asking the indigenous tuning expert a series
of questions--if the questions are phrased in
terms of Western European musical assumptions,
what possible use can the answers be?  It's as
though a bunch of Javanese music theorists came to
the U.S. and asked Western symphony orchestra
musicians: "What bem do you use?  And how
do you arrive at your rasa?"  The answers could
not possibly make sense.
And the previous practice of simply measuring
tunings in terms of cents and trying to fit them
into Western equal-tempered or ji tuning models
was also less than satisfactory. After all, a set of
measurements of native instruments does not
*by itself* tell us what the local tuning experts
were trying to achieve...while a digital record of the
tuning process *might just do that*
"Applying Psychoacoustics in Composition: 'Harmonic'
Progressions of 'Nonharmonic' Sonorities," by Richard
Parncutt and Hans Strasburger, in Perspectives of New
Music, Vol. 32, No. 1, 1995, is also likely to prove
interesting to the prospective xenharmonic composer.
Finally--finally!--music theorists are beginning to wake
up to the reality Plomp and Levelt revealed in 1965:
--An INharmonic series of vertical partials will sound
entirely transparent and consonant as long as the distance
between each successive partial is greater than the
critical bandwidth at that frequency.
While visionary composers like Jean-Claude Risset,
John Chowning, James Dashow and Jonathan Harvey
have long taken advantage of this psychoacoustic fact, 
for just as many decades the music theorists have 
ignored this reality.  
Parncutt & Strasberg's paper is thus a welcome addition
to the literature.  By basing their compositional theories
on Ernst Terhardt's model of hearing, they've gone
back to basics--to the way the human ear hears, rather
than abstract set theory, or partition functions, or
abstract algebra, or combinatorics, or matrix operations, 
none of which has any necessary connection to what 
the ear actually HEARS.
Among other praiseworthy ideas, P & S suggest:
"(i) the model takes as its starting point the spectrum of
a sonority, rather than its musical notation."  This is
a VITAL advance in music theory.  Now that arbitrarily
complex and inharmonic timbres can be generated by
computer, the composer needs to consider the implications
of timbre as well as such familiar concepts as root note,
voice-leading, the relationship twixt harmony and melody,
etc.
Moreover, P & S insure that "The model is not octave 
generalized; it is based on pitch height...rather than pitch
class."  Another extremely important point.  Octaves
certainly have their uses, but many of us compose in
tunings without octaves.  Why ought we to be hamstrung
by  600-year-old dogmas obsessed with subdividing a
2:1 interval...which interval does not exist in many of 
the tunings we happen to use?
P & S also point out many subtleties often unrecognized
by music theorists: for instance, the  psychoacoustic
effects produced by mistuned harmonics, etc. Listeners
still perceive substantially mistuned harmonics as
making a contribution to the formant--and so on.
P & S offer C code for an algorithm to evaluate vertical
sonorities according to their theory--something sure to
be useful to many xenharmonists who compose with timbre.
Alas, the article also suffers from a number of 
omissions and oversights.
First and most important, P & S base their compositional
theory solely on Ernst Terhardt's theory of hearing.
Terhardt is a well-known psychoacoustician who's done
excellent work in the field.  However, Terhardt's theory
of hearing is merely one among many.  More: Tehardt is
a dyed-in-the-wool place theorist, and this tends to
bias some of his conclusions.  There is, for
example, *no* discussion in any of Terhardt's papers
of the contradictions and paradoxes bedeviling place
theory--for example, that measured jnd's substantially
exceed those predicted by the physics of the place
theory of hearing.  
Thus there is good reason to believe that the model of
hearing on which Parncutt & Strasberg have based their
compositional theory is incomplete, and does not explain
many important aspects of the human auditory system.
P & S also make statements which tend to mislead
the unwary reader: "The perception of the pitch of a 
complex tone such as a musical tone (piano, violin, voice, 
and so on) involves pattern recognition (Goldstein
1973, Terhardt 1972 and 1974)."  
In fact there is no consensus, nor yet any convincing
body of evidence, as to the exact processes  involved in 
the perception of the pitch of a complex tone. While
Parncutt & Strasberg claim that musical perception
is a matter of "pattern recognition," in actual fact
this is merely one of three competing theories of
the way the ear/brains system operates.
The other theories are that the inner ear performs
a mechanical Fourier transform, and that the
auditory nerve running from the inner ear to the
brain extracts & encodes the underlying periodicity
of sound waves detected by the inner ear.
While there is some evidence in support of the
pattern recognition of hearing (first advanced
by Wightman, by the way--not Goldstein!),
there is also some evidence AGAINST the
pattern recognition theory of hearing.  There is
also a great deal of evidence FOR the other two
theories of hearing, none of which Parncutt &
Strsberg seem to be aware of.
On top of these lacunae, P & S proceed to collapse
their model down to 12 pitch-classes.  This is a
pretty low blow.  After much fine talk about freeing
the composer from octave equivalence, etc., they
wind up giving another recipe for producing pretty
sounds in 12-equal.
File that one under the category "The beatings were
scientifically designed to enhance creativity."
Lastly, P & S betray a profound lack of familiarity
with the microtonal and psychoacoustics literature.
Their bibliography is full of extremely glaring
gaps and omissions:  for instance, they omit completely
most of the CLASSIC articles on composing with inharmonic
sonorities:   John R. Pierce's letter "Attaining Consonance
in Arbitrary Scales," In JASA, 1966; Mathews' and Pierce's
"Control of Consonance and Dissonance With Nonharmonic
Overtones"  in "Music by Computers," ed. Beauchamp & Von 
Foerster, 1969; Jean-Claude Risset's "Digital Experiments: 
1964...." in Computer Music Journal, 1984; James Dashow's 
"Spectra As Chords" in Comptuer Music Journal, 1980; 
William Sethares' "Local Consonance and..."  in JASA, September
1992, my own "The Uses and Characterisics of Non-Just
Non-Equal-Tempered Scales" in Xenharmonikon 15, 1993,
and last (but not least!) Slaymaker, "Chords From Tones
Having Stretched Partials," JASA, 1970 and Geary, J. R., 
"Consonance of Pairs of Inharmonic Tones," JASA, 1980.
If a nudnik like myself can rattle off this many obvious
references from memory, shouldn't Parncutt & Strasberg
have been able to do the half an hour or so of research 
required by minimal standards of scholarships?  Ought 
not these two distinguished researchers to have been able 
to dredge up adequate citations for their article?
Such negligence bespeaks more than mere laziness; it
augurs a total lack of interest in looking outside their own
narrow little sphere of interest--namely, the theories
developed "by Ernst Terhardt and his colleauges at the 
Institute of Electroacoustics, Technical University of 
Munich."
Thus, while Parncutt & Strasberg's article is a promising
start, it falls short on many counts.  
Withal, still a worthwhile and useful article.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Mon, 5 Feb 1996 00:17 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id PAA29226; Sun, 4 Feb 1996 15:16:58 -0800
Date: Sun, 4 Feb 1996 15:16:58 -0800
Message-Id: <960204231257_71670.2576_HHB69-6@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu