source file: mills2.txt
Date: Wed, 11 Oct 1995 14:29:05 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & psychoacoustics - post 17 of 25
---
While Ohm's/Helmholtz's view of the ear as Fourier  analyzer has staggered
under the blows of psychoacoustic research, so has the
Seebeck/Stumpf/Schouten model of the ear as a neural periodicity pitch
detector.
True, 50 years of research has unearthed many results which cannot be
explained by the frequency-domain model or "place theory" of hearing... But the
periodicity model of hearing has *also  *shown many shortcomings.
In particular, both models of the ear/brain system fail to explain or predict
the important phenomenon of categorical perception.  Neither model of hearing ex
plains the existence or pitch of the Zwicker Tone, or Risset's and
Shepherd's auditory paradoxes (sounds which when transposed upward by an
octave, drop in perceived pitch; sounds which appear to rise or fall
indefinitely in pitch yet whose fundamental frequency never changes;
sounds which are heard as speeding up/slowing down constantly yet whose
rate never changes).
Moreover, if the structure of the human ear is responsible for the music we
make and the tunings we use and the harmonies we prefer, how is it possible
to explain the fact that different cultures make entirely different kinds of
music?
If the ear is either a Fourier analyzer or a time-based autocorrelator which
responds most powerfully to either small-integer ratios played on
instruments with integer harmonics (the Fourier analysis model of hearing)
or fixed pitches played on instruments whose partials are matched to the
tuning--for example, the Railsback stretch of the grand piano matched to
the stretch of the partials of the piano strings--(this is the autocorrelation
model of hearing in which tuning & timbral partials, even if stretched, will
autocorrelate so as to yield uniform time-domain periodicities and thus a
sense of definite pitch with fundamental)...
If either of these models of hearing is accurate, why do the Javanese play
inharmonic instruments using stretched octaves and non-just non-equal-
tempered tunings?
Are other cultures deranged?  Are their ears physically different from ours?
Musicologists of the 19th century dismissed the Javanese, the Balinese, and
other non-western music with references to "the degree of aural
development among races as well as individuals."
The variability in Javanese and Balinese tunings was dismissed by De Lange
and Snelleman in 1992 with the memorable phrase: "for those whose ears
are insufficiently developed, the perfect fourth is not divided into two
whole tones and a semitone, but rather as the sixth, eventh and eighth
harmonic partials." [DeLange, Daniel and Snellman, J.F, "La Musique et les
instruments de musique dans les Indes Orientales neerlandaises," in
Lavignac, "Encylopedie de la musique et dictionnaire du COnservatoire:
Histoire de la musique, premiere partie (Paris, 1922," Vol. 5, pg. 3148.]
Such racism has become less fashionable over the last three quarters of a
century, but much of the debate over psychoacoustics and tuning takes place
in a cultural vacuum: only western music is considered, and psychoacoustic
arguments for or against this or that tuning are often made only in the
context of western equal temperament or just intonation tuning systems.
However, such enthocentrism is slowly changing.
"One of the revelations of modern psychoacoustic and etnomusicological
reserach has been the extraordinary complexity of intonation as used by
Western and non-Western musicians." [Perlman, Marc, "American Gamelan in
the Garden of Eden: Intonation in a Cross-Cultural Encounter," Musical
Quarterly, 1995, pg. 532]
"There are...a number of musical cultures that apparently employ
approximately equally tempered 5- and 7-interval scales (i.e., 240 and 171
cent step-sizes, respectively) in which the fourths and fifths are
significantly mistuned form their natural values.  Seven-interval scales are
usually associated with Southeast Asian cultures (Malm, 1967). For
example, Morton (1974) reports measurements (with a Stroboconn) of the
tuning of a Thai xylophone that "varied only + or - 5 cents" from an equally
tempered 7-interval tuning. (In ethnomusicological studies measurement
variability, if reported at all, is generally reported without definition.)
Haddon reported (1952) another example of a xylophone tuned in 171-cent
steps from the Chopi tribe in Uganda.  The 240-cent step-size, 5-interval
scales are typically associated with the "gamelan" (tuned gongs and
xylophone-type instruments) orchestras of Java and Bali (e., Kunst, 1949).
However, mreasurements of gamelan tuning byHood (1966) and McPhee (1966)  show e
xtremely large variations, so much so that McPhee states: "Deviations  in what i
s considered the same scale are so large that
one might with  reason state that there are as many scales as there
are gamelans." Another example of a 5-interval, 24--cent step tuning
 (measured by a  stroboconn,  "variations" of 15 cents) was reported by
 Wachsmann (1950) for a Ugandan harp.  Other examples of equally tempered scales
 are often reported for pre-instrumental cultures...
For example, Boiles (1969) reports measurements (with a Stroboconn,
"+ or - 5 cents accuracy") of a South American Indian scale with equal
intervals of 175 cents, which results in a progressive octave stretch.
Ellis (1963), in extensive measurements in Australian
aboriginal pre-instrumental cultures, reports pitch distirbutions that
apparently follow arithmetic scales (i.e., equal separation in Hz).
Thus there seems to be a propensity for scales that do not utilize perfect
consonances and that are in many cases highly variable, in cultures that
either are pre-instrumental or whose main instruments are of the xylophone
type. Instruments of this type produce tones who partials are largely
inharmonic (see Rossing, 1976) and whose pitches are often ambiguous (see
de Boer, 1976)." [Burns, E. M. and Ward, W. D., "Intervals, Scales and Tuning,"
in The Psychology of Music, 1982, ed. Diana Deutsch, pg. 258]
These empirical data would seem to indicate that  of the three tunings (equal te
mpered,  just intonation, and non-just non-equal-tempered)
non-just non-equal-tempered and equal temperament are most widely
used by other cultures.  This is a conclusion directly opposite to that
implied by the idea of small whole numbers as uniquely preferred by
the ear/brain system.
The next post will examine in detail the third theory of hearing, first
proposed by Fetis in 1843, and in later life espoused by Helhmoltz: namely,
the view that the ear prefers a set of intervals determined by learning
and culture.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Thu, 12 Oct 1995 03:16 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id SAA00081; Wed, 11 Oct 1995 18:15:55 -0700
Date: Wed, 11 Oct 1995 18:15:55 -0700
Message-Id: <951012011313_71670.2576_HHB40-2@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu