source file: mills2.txt
Date: Wed, 13 Dec 1995 17:15:13 -0800

Subject: Thoughts on Brian's posts

From: "Jo A. Hainline" <hainline@unr.edu>

Several months ago I began to write this post and finally have 
taken a few minutes to make some limited sense of my thoughts 
and at least complete them to this point--I hope this is not 
too untimely.


	Brian's recent posts on n-j n-e-t scales and previous 
excellent survey of psychoacoustic research have stimulated 
many thoughts.  The fact that his ideas are presented with such 
erudite precision makes it perhaps difficult to question such 
scholarly thinking--in fact they are a marvel to read and 
stimulating to the intellect.  We are fortunate that Brian 
graces this forum with his thoughts.  Non the less, I am 
concerned with the thrust of his argument.

	Perhaps I'm a bit "old fashioned", but I have always 
been under the impression that this whole tuning business came 
about with the effort to seek perfection or at least that which 
is more perfect in an imperfect world--or, perhaps create order 
out of chaos, or meaning and understanding out of the apparent 
random senslessness of events in our lives and the inevitable 
death of all that lives.  Put another way, we seem to be drawn 
to attempt to link our experience with something beyond the 
immediate--whether this be to establish a calender to predict 
the seasons and reassure ourselves of better times during long 
winter nights or laws and courts to better control or predict 
relationships with the neighbors, or musical scales, to better 
harmonize with the eternal.  Of course there are a great many 
opinions as to what that perfection is, or perhaps more 
accurately, what the best approximation of that perfection is 
in this imperfect world.  Obviously we may never find 
perfection here, or the Good, or Platonic forms or the 
Archetypes of which this imperfect temporal world (Plato's 
cave) in which we find ourselves is but a shadowy reflection. 
But an element of the human spirit, or psyche if you will, 
resides in this world and seeks to commune with the eternal.  I 
believe that music is one of the main potential avenues of 
expression of this Soul.  Music in its most sublime expression 
is always a search for or expression of transcendance.  That 
which does not is an intellectual or emotional masturbation.

	Can it be that that we have come to the brink of
nihilism with regards to tuning?  Is it possible for me to walk
around my room striking random objects to create bongs and
thugs and dinks with which I can then, with tremendous
mathematical insight, create some sort of algorithmic
justification for unifying this cacophany of tones into a
"musical" scale?  What possible value can be derived from such
an exercise?  Or is it more appropriate to generate a scale
from some imaginary number series?  irrational or
transcendental numbers?  Aren't we here, like Toad, "just
messing about in boats"?

	Non the less, I believe Brian's scholarship can be 
interpreted at least 2 ways.  First, and perhaps expressing the 
apparent thrust of Brian's own argument, that scientific 
experimentation reveals that simple principles of acoustics 
that seem to have been perhaps unconsciously taken for granted 
for such a long time and formed the driving force behind 12 ET 
do not adequately describe the phenomenon of hearing--that 
hearing itself is an extremely complex process and that no 
current model adequately describes all of the observable facts 
of its processes.  And because of this there is no 
justification for accepting one particular tuning system over 
another--in fact many mathematical models exist for basing 
tuning schemes.  Actually an almost infinite variety of tuning 
schemes are available based upon concrete mathematical models.  
The impression left is that vast new worlds of exploration are 
available for dabbling for the pioneering spirit.  But to what 
end? I must ask myself.  Is there not some higher vision, other 
than that it is new or different, that directs this thrust?

	I believe that it can be equally interpretted that the 
scientific evidence merely demonstrates the imperfection of 
this world and the imperfection of scientific measuring 
devices, mental models, etc.  Is it a wonder that vibrating 
strings or columns of air do not describe mathematically 
"perfect" features, given molecular constraints, gravity, 
friction, etc.?  It is equally unsurprising that the hearing 
process in all its complexities does not hold to a simple model 
due to the imperfection of its function.  This in no way, 
though, proves that simple mathematical models are not the 
templates which this "real world" imperfectly reflects.  Why 
should not musical scale attempt to reflect how sound itself is 
generated--not the imperfection as it manifests in the world 
around us, but as it is described by a so called perfectly 
vibrating body.  Could this somehow lead that part of the human 
psyche which can respond to things perfect and eternal towards 
a meaning beyond the apparent meaningless chaos that so often 
confronts us here?


Bruce Kanzelmeyer



Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Sat, 16 Dec 1995 20:13 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id LAA16343; Sat, 16 Dec 1995 11:13:02 -0800
Date: Sat, 16 Dec 1995 11:13:02 -0800
Message-Id: <01BACBEA.4DCA4F80@mac15.emap.co.uk>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu