source file: mills2.txt
Date: Mon, 24 Jun 1996 12:56:19 -0700

Subject: Post from McLaren

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

From: mclaren
Subject: The French spectral composers
--
A while back, Johnny Reinhard mentioned in
passing the French "spectral composers."
This is a movement that doesn't yet have
a name in America.
In France, the two most prominent spectral
composers are Gerard Grisey and Tristan
Mureil.
These composers consider psychoacoustics
more important to composition than Fortean
pitch-class matrix serialist theory or other
non-sensory-based methods of ordering notes
and timbres.
The result of Grisey's and Mureil's work
has been a series of remarkable compositions
which blend almost-just pitches into a set
of tonally fused timbres which shift in
a prismatic and uncanny way.
I say the pitches are "almost just" because
Tristan Mureil, Gerard Grisey, and their most
prominent disciple, Philliphe Hurel, don't use
true small-whole-number ratios in their music.
Instead, they round off the just values to the
nearest eighth- (sometimes sixteenth-) tone
and notate and have the music performed that
way.
The result is sometimes peculiar, from a pure
hard-core American JI perspective.  However,
all three of these composers are extremely
talented and their work is well worth listening
to.
However, it's hard to get hold of.  IRCAM has put
out a CD of Phillipe Hurel's pieces performed
by the Ensemble Contemporaine at the Espace
Projection in Paris. Other than that CD, there's
little available in this country.  (I heard Grisey's
"Joure, contre-jour" and some Mureil pieces whose
names escape me off cassette at a friend's house. 
The friend had just returned from Paris.)
This is one instance where the French seem to
be ahead of us Americans.  While isolated voices
like John R. Pierce and James Dashow and 
William Sethares have been talking about the
musical and compositional benefits of fitting
timbre to tuning, there is as yet no organized
movement of "spectral composition" in America.
This is peculiar, inasmuch as virtuoso groups like
Johnny Reinhard's AFMM exist in prominent American
cities, and these performers can *easily* perform
high-limit just ratios on traditional acoustic
instruments.
Listening to Johnny Reinhard quadratic just intonation
string quartet "Cosmic Rays" made my jaw drop.  These
performers can hit *any* pitch, and do it at top speed,
and do it consistently.
You'd think with these kind of musicians available in
this country, we'd have a full-blown "spectral 
composition" movement.
To give you an idea of how important the spectral
composition movement is in French avant-garde
circles right now, consider the following quote
from Denis Cohen:
"I tried to show in an article I wrote ("Ulysses
and the Mermaids") that the contrast often made
in France between serial music and spectral music
was probably useful conceptually, but was 
incomplete and bore littel relation with reality."
In America, the contrast is between the New Complexity
and minimalism of one sort or another.  But in
France, the lines of division are drawn between
Fortean set-theory serialism and spectral
composition.
--
Another (non-spectral) French composer of note
is the aforementioned Denis Cohen.  I mention
him because IRCAM has released a new CD of
his music, the last track of which is microtonal.
"Il SOgno Di Dedalo" (1990-1991).
According to Richard Toop's liner notes,
"Without venturing a key to the labyrinth of
Il Sogno Di Dedalo, one can at least draw
attention to some recurrent elements: loping,
almost *ethnic* percussion rhythms, rapid
melodies in (mostly) four-part harmony,
little brass glissandi, falling (and later,
rising) microtonal scales, and throbbing
Varese-like brass chords." [Toop, R., liner
notes to "Il Sogno Di Dedalo]
This is a fine piece of music and distinctly
xenharmonic.
This is  Musique France d'Ajourd Hui CD sponoserd
by the SACEM and Radio France. It is probably
available from Harmonia Mundi as an import.
Highly recommended.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Tue, 25 Jun 1996 11:23 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id CAA07603; Tue, 25 Jun 1996 02:23:03 -0700
Date: Tue, 25 Jun 1996 02:23:03 -0700
Message-Id: <199606250921.CAA07516@eartha.mills.edu>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu