source file: mills2.txt
Date: Tue, 16 Jul 1996 13:48:19 -0700

Subject: Re: tuning the harmonica

From: Pat Missin <patm@globalnet.co.uk>

It may be that I am attempting to make a square circle, but I was sure that
if anyone could help me with the "perfect" tuning for the harmonica, they
would probably be a subscriber to this list. Several suggestions have been
made - all of them a compromise of some sort, but perhaps different
compromises suit different circumstances. My thanks for all of those who
have toaken th time to think about the subject.

The 10-hole single reed diatonic harmonica (known as Richter, after its
designer) has twenty reeds - a blow reed and a draw reed to each hole. The
blow reeds form the series of notes:

C  E  G  C  E  G  C  E  G  C  E  G

The draw reeds are arranged to give s full diatonic scale in the mid-range
of the harp, but omit and/or duplicate certain notes to give a C and a G
chord in the lower octave for accompaniment and to keep the C major triad as
blow notes.

D  G  B  D  F  A  B  D  F  A

Traditionally, the chord ws tuned as a just G dominant 9th (the F being a
septimal seventh above the G. This sounds great in the G domintant chord,
but very flat in melodies. To compromise, it was later tuned as a
Pythagorean seventh above the G. This sounded nicer when the DFA triad was
played, but the F-A interval was a rather rough sounding Pyth M3rd; so if
you used these two notes to suggest a subdominant chord, some unpleasant
combination tones were produced. More recently, because the issue of being
in tune with other musicians was raised so often (harmonica players
wondering why their instruments were "flat" intstead of wondering why the
other instruments were in the compromise of 12TET!), there has been a
tendency to tune the F even sharper, in some cases getting close to a just
Dm chord, but this mkes the G7 almost unbearable. In many cases, the Es and
Bs were also tuned a bit higher (midway between just and 12TET). There are
other commonly used tunings (I have a collection of about 100, but most of
these are far from "commonly used"), based on modal rearrangemnts of this
set. For example, the harmonica minor. The blow notes are a repeaing Cm
triad and the draw notes are tuned:

D  G  B  D  F  Ab B  D  F  Ab

Traditionally, this series was tuned as 8/10/12/14/17 - again some of the
individual intervals sound a little rough, but as this harp is hardly ever
played in anything other than Cm, that's not much of a problem. Blues and
country-style players usually use a C harp to play in the key of G (cross
harp), oso to get a major scale out of this position (as the modes are caled
in harp-speak), the "country tuning" was developed, which is the same as the
standard Richter, but raises the F to F#. This presents not problems with
intonation (the F# is a perfect 5th above the B, a pure M3rd above the D, a
pure m3rd below the A, etc.) Also, there is the natural minor (again based
on the C harp, but the natural minor scale starts from the G). The blow
notes are a Cm triad and the draw notes thus:

D  G  Bb D  F  A  Bb  D  F  A.

Again, this tunes justly with no real problems - it's one of my favorites
because of the perfect 4ths and 5ths you can doublestop (and how well it
lends itself to BbM as well as Gm). The chromatic beast I have described
earlier - as I have pointed out, it's problem is the Dm6 chord produced by
the draw notes. The usual way around this is 12TET.

Phew! There you have it - the history of the harmonica's tuning. Various
other approaches have been tried (including so-called "spiral" tunings,
which spreads the scale out into a 13th chord, for example the blow notes
could be:

C  E  G  B  D  F  A  C  E  G 

and the draw notes:

D  F  A  C  E  G  B  D  F  A

This seems to lend itself rather well to various meantone ideas.) Other
designs have used something like a slide chromatic to produce a "perfect"
diatonic (as one of you suggested), but these have not met with much success.

I hope this is of interest to someone out there!


Pat Missin.

"...my music's a lot better than it sounds!" (with apologies to Mark Twain)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------


Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Wed, 17 Jul 1996 00:14 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id PAA17352; Tue, 16 Jul 1996 15:14:28 -0700
Date: Tue, 16 Jul 1996 15:14:28 -0700
Message-Id: <95960716185259/0005695065PK2EM@MCIMAIL.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu