source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sun, 29 Oct 1995 08:35:42 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Our friends at Ensoniq
---
To date little has been said regarding the
Ensoniq corporation.  Someone needs to point
out how much we owe  people like Steve Curtin,
and his fellow Ensoniq engineers.
Let's start with the fact that if you want a
sampler with built-in tuning tables,  were it 
not for Ensoniq you'd be in deep guano.
It's incredibly important that a sampler include
a tuning table.  Without one, the only
reliable way to break out of 12 on a sampler
is to use a separate sample for each MIDI note.  
This gobbles memory at a *staggering* rate.  For a 2-
second stereo sample at 44.1 Khz spread over (say)
36 notes, this would demand 6.05 megs of RAM 
*per MIDI channel.*
For 16 MIDI channels, that's a mind-boggling
96.89 megs of RAM!
By contrast, if your sampler allows you to
use a tuning table you save an *incredible*
of RAM.  Moving to more than 12 tones
per octave lets you spread each sample over
even *more* keys than in 12--for a 31-tone
equal tempered tuning, for instance, you can
spread each sample over 31/12 times as
many MIDI notes.  This means that if you've
got a multi-sampled sound that spreads
each sample over (say) 3 MIDI notes in 12,
a tuning table allows you to *drop* memory
requirements by letting you spread each sample
over 8 MIDI notes.  
Compare the two situations.  In one case, the
lack of a tuning table forces you to gobble RAM
by using 36 separate samples; in the other case,
a built-in tuning table lets you *save* that RAM
by using only 36/7.8 = 5 separate samples. The
savings in RAM is ENORMOUS: a full 
[1 - (36 - 5/36)] * 100 = 80%!  
This really matters.  
We're not talking about just 10% or 
even 20% or 30% savings of RAM here...a tuning 
table makes an ENORMOUS differece.  It lets
you use 1/2-1/6 of the memory you'd otherwise use.
This is *crucial* because the problem with every
sampler is lack of RAM.  No matter how much 
you've got it's never enough.  And forcing the
microtonal user to burn up gobs and gobs of RAM
by duplicating each sample on every single MIDI
note is so wasteful as to defy description.
Clearly, Ensoniq's inclusion of a tuning table (a
separate tuning table for each layer of each sample,
in fact) on the ASR-10 qualifies as one of
the biggest gifts to microtonalists ever. 
Period.
Of course, there's more.
Ensoniq builds reliable products.  They sound pretty
good.  Other companies have flashier technology,
but Ensoniq's synths sound about as excellent as
anything out there.  The big *musical* advantage
Ensoniq enjoys, of course, is that they've supported
micrtonality by including built-in tuning tables
every since 1989.   I'm not sure why they made that
decision--there doesn't seem to be a lot of 
economic benefit in tuning tables.  However, I can
say that I've bought a bunch of Ensoniq gear ever
since they started building tuning tables into their
synths.  As long as they keep including tuning tables,
I'll keep buying their equipment.
This is particularly noteworthy behavior for a large
synth manufcaturer because many of the other clueless
and brain-dead synth companies still refuse to include
full-keyboard microtuning.  Especially the Japanese.
Weird, when you think about it.  Which culture uses
a non-12 pentatonic scale?  (The Japanese)  And which
culture is more frenziedly committed to 12-TET?
(The Japanese!) Kawai, Akai and many others
fanatically refuse to let their instruments be retuned.
They're adamant about it to the point of psychosis.  The
behaviour is almost Manson-like in is self-destructivness,
yet they persist.
As a result I won't buy Kawai or Akai synths.  Let 'em
rot: they can come out with a synth that does
everything buy makes coffee and I still wouldn't even
use it as a boat anchor.
Ensoniq's commitment to microtonality deserves special
mention on this forum.  I have nothing but good things to
say about their synths. (it would nice if they dropped their
prices, but then I wish all mfrs would drop their prices;
what else is new?) Bottom line: if you're serious about
microtonality, eventually you will discover that kludges
and gyrations and contortions and weird clumy work-
arounds like tuning each note with pitch-bend, etc.,
just don't work after a certain point.  You run out of
MIDI bandwidth, notes start to get dropped, attacks 
sound twangy, and the logistics of such kludges just
become insupportable for even moderately complex
compositions.
In the end, a built-in full keyboard tuning table is 
an absolute  necessity for serious MIDI microtonality.
And Ensoniq and Yamaha are the only two synth 
manufacturers that have consistently stuck to
their support for tuning tables.  
Best of all, Ensoniq--unlike Yahama--has refused to
throw away its best technology.  Yamaha's insane
decision to stop making FM synths is a mistake Ensoniq
would never have made: instead, Ensoniq just keeps
making its instruments bigger, better and more
capable.  Ensoniq refuses to give up on a product. 
They just keep adding features and upgrading the
ROMs until the synth does everything you could reasonably
want.  That's a good attitude for a synth company to
have, especially nowadays when the Japanese are
coming out with a new model every 6 months that
renders obsolete all previous RAM cartridges, editors, 
voice disks, etc.  but doesn't sound any different or
do any more than the Japanese synths of 5 years ago.
Bottom line?
Everyone on this forum should offer Steve Curtin and
his fellow engineers at Ensoniq a very long,
very appreciative round of applause.
We owe them a lot.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Mon, 30 Oct 1995 07:07 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id VAA17788; Sun, 29 Oct 1995 21:07:07 -0800
Date: Sun, 29 Oct 1995 21:07:07 -0800
Message-Id: <951030050412_71670.2576_HHB30-6@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu