source file: mills2.txt
Date: Thu, 14 Nov 1996 09:00:53 -0800

Subject: Post from Brian McLaren

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

From: mclaren
Subject: Technology drives tuning
--
Having made this claim, it behooves me
to offer proof.
We read in Boethius that Pythagoras
discovered the relationship of fifth
and octave by listening to a blacksmith's
hammers.  The weights of the hammers
purportedly produced different pitches
when the blacksmith smote the anvil.
This is of course pure fantasy.  Hammers
of different weights striking an anvil
give off the same tone at different
volumes.  It is the bell, not the clapper,
which produces a tone, and the pitch of
the tone is not determined by the mass
of the clapper but by the mass and
shape of the bell. (Bells have recently
been designed by computer to sound a
major chord rather than a minor chord.)
In any case, simply doubling the weight
which hangs at the end of a string would
produce a pitch in the ratio of 1.414 to the
original note (Pythagoras was supposed to
have rushed home and performed this
experiment; obviously he did not, nor
did Boethius. Galileo's father did, and
published the results.).  Doubling anvil weights
produces an interval not of an octave but
a tritone. As it happens, vibrating metal
bars behave differently from strings, and
so the tale about Pythagoras is a myth.
However, this tall tale shows pretty clearly
the level of technology available in classical
Greece.  Pythagoras didn't rush home and
try out his theory on a keyboard instrument
or a  zither with 88 different strings at
high tension because the Greeks didn't have
the technology to build such instruments.
For one thing, you have to know a good deal
about metallurgy to produce tough wires as
would be needed in a harpsichord or zither or 
piano; for another, the Greeks didn't have
the technology to machine metal as is
required to produce metal screws, iron
frameworks for pianos, etc.
What sort of intonation system is most
appropriate for a technology limited to
lyres with only a few gut strings and
some wind instruments?
Because gut changes its tension with
humidity and because it must be kept at
low tension lest the gut strings break,
the intonation best suited for such 
technology would use only the simplest
and most obvious members of the harmonic
series.  Plucked gut strings produce harmonic
series timbres, so the second and third
members of the harmonic series would be
most useful in tuning such instruments. 
Because of the extremely low tension of
a tortoise-shell lyre (try and add a lot of
strings or tune them to high tension and 
either the back of the lyre will collapse
or the gut strings will snap), the sounds
will be faint and only the very lowest
harmonics will be audible.  The 5th 
harmonic and higher harmonics would
probably have been extremely faint on
a plucked gut string, too faint to tune
to.
Thus the technology of classical Greek
music lent itself primarily to Pythagorean
tuning.
The tuning of auloi is not so limited; however,
it remains unclear what the Greek auloi were.
Some authors claim they were similar to
oboes, in which case they would demand
a tremendous amount of air.  Other authors
claims the Greek auloi were more flute-like,
in which case the sound would have been much
louder and the players less sorely taxed.
However, even today it's impossible to calculate
precisely the position of tone holes for simple
wood instruments theoretically; the theory
never matches the actual position.  In classical
times, the position of tone holes would have
been a matter of guesstimation, and this
would have necessarily limited the intonational
complexity of Greek auloi.
Net result? 
Pythagorean tuning was a technological
necessity for the Greeks, as it was for
the bablyonians and the Sumerians.  These
latter recorded a Pythagorean tuning on
tablet U7/80 (Side 2) in the British Museum; it
is almost certain that the tall tales about
Pythagoras mask an intonational tradition
which drifted from the older civilizations
of Egypt and the Euphrates valley to the
newer civilizations of the Mediterranean.
--  
Inventions were common in the classical
era of ancient Greece: Ktesibos of Alexandria
build a device to produce "intermittant bird
song" around 270 B.C. It worked by regulating
the flow of water into a closed chamber.
But such devices were very limited in their
musical utility because the air pressure was
low and so the "bird songs" would have
been extremely faint--and when the chamber
designed to catch the streamof water filled 
up, the sound would have stopped.
Ktesibos solved this problem by using a
double-barreled water pump he had devised
to fight fires--he modified this pump
to create a continuous source of compressed
air.  The roman author Hero reports around
the first century B.C. that Ktesibos used
three components to  build his hydraulis
(water organ): a single-cylinder air pump,
a large cistern filled with water, and a smaller
vessel attached to the bottom of the cistern
to act as a regulator to keep constant the rate of
flow of water out of the cistern.
This organ used sliders moving in and out
of slots below each pipe; the sliders
were controlled by the keys of the keyboard
and when a player pressed a key, the hole
in the slider aligned with the opening in
the corresponding pipe.  By spring action, the
keys recoiled, dragging each slider back to
its closed position.
Notice several problems with this organ.
First, it must have required at least as
much force to depress a key as would
be required to drag each slider back into
its closed position.  Second, the organ
can play only as long as the cistern 
contains water.  Third, the size of the
cistern and its height determine 
the maximum available air pressure and thus
the total number of pipes and the maximum
volume of the sound.  But the biggest
problem is that as more and more keys
were depressed, the air pressure would
drop because the regulator at the bottom
of the cistern would prohibit water from
flowing at more than a certain maximum
rate from the reservoir.  This means that
if more than one key was depressed, the
overall air pressure of the organ would
drop and the overall pitch of all notes
would fall.  It would not have been
possible to remedy this by eliminating
the regulator, since its purpose is to
maintain even air pressure--otherwise
there would initially be high air pressure
as a great mass of water started to 
press down on the pump at the start
and the air pressure would continually
fall as the mass of water in the 
cistern continually lessened.
Thus Ktesibos' organ would not have
been useful for performing with other
instruments, since its pitch changed
as more keys were depressed. Also,
it could only play for a short time,
and the creaking of the wooden pump
and the burble of water pouring out
of the cistern would have made the
instrument hard to hear.
As a result, the hydraulis was only
a novelty item.  Even so it impressed
contemporaries: Athenaeus describes
a feast at which the hydraulis was
discussed: "The sound of the hydraulis
was heard close by.  So pleasant and 
charming was it that we all turned 
towards the sound, fascinating by the
harmony."
The reaction here hints at the surprise
and shock Alexandrian citizens must
have felt at hearing sustained chords.
This was clearly alien to their experience.
It is reasonable to assume that the 
hydraulis used Pythagorean intonation;
remember that the pitch changes as
more keys are depressed.  This would make
an elaborate tuning system very hard
to tune up. Even Pythagorean was probably
only roughly approximated on such organs.
The Romans used such instruments at
the arena; the oldest archaeological remains
of an organ were unearthed at Aquincum
(near currest-day Budapest), dedicated
in A.D. 228 to the college of weavers there.
Having listened to the hydraulis, the 
Pythagorean Philolaus proclaimed: "The
nature of number and harmony admits
no falsehood... But in fact number, fitting
all things into the soul through
sense-perception makes them recognizable
and comparable with one another."
This is a fine statement of the 
Pythagorean conception of the universe as
an expression of pure theoretical math.
Music was unpopular with the early 
leaders of Christianity. Divine revelation
was preferred to the study of nature.
Early Christian thinkers did not have
much interest in the application of
logic and the study of physical evidence
(an attitude represented on this forum
by Greg Taylor); instead, they preferred 
the mystic contemplation of sacred verse, 
from which music proved an unwanted 
distraction.
Saint Augustine wrote in the early 5th
century that he found music in any form
suspect, but allowed as how "now when 
I hear sung in a sweet and well-trained
voice those mleodies...I do, I confess,
feel a pleasurable relaxation. But this
bodily pleasure to which the mind should
not succumb without enervation, often
deceives me.... In these matters I sin
without realizing it." 
The message is clear: to the early
Christians, beautiful music was a sin.
(This is an attitude remarkably similar
to that of many academic music theorists
of the modern day.)
--
The first organ to reach Western Europe
after the sack of Rome in 476 was a
gift from the Byzantine emperor 
Constantine V to the Frankish king
Pepin in the year 757. The gift
excited amazement because its like
had not been seen for hundreds of 
years--a clear indication of how
much knowledge and scientific
thought could be lost forgotten and
how badly the capacity for clear
thinking could erode during the
Dark Ages (a fate which awaits us
all if we follow the prescriptions
of the Eric Lyons and the Greg Taylors
of the world).
Ermold le Noir wrote an epic in which
he proclaimed "Even the organ, never
yet seen in France, which was the 
overweening pride of Greece and which
in Constantinople was the sole reason
for them to feel superior to us--even 
that is now in the palace of Aix."
The organ was slowly transformed
into an engine of divine worship in
the churches--this took a while, given
the attitude of Augustine: "Whatever
knowledge man has acquired outside
of Holy Writ, if it be harmful it is there
condemned; if it be wholesome, it is
there contained." (An attitude remarkably
similar to that of contemporary music
professors, save that their Holy Writ is
Schoenberg's "Harmonielehre" and John
Cage's "Silence.")
Organs were increasingly optimized for
volume. By the 990s this led to what
Wulstan described as "Like Thunder,
the strident voice assails the ear,
shutting out all other sounds than its
own; such are its reverberations,
echoing here and there, that each man
lifts his hands to stop his ears, unable
as he drawn hear to tolerate the roaring
of so many different and noisy combinations."
Clearly volume came at the price of
intonational precision--the "noisy 
combinations" surely describe the
effect of an unsteady air-flow on
the pitches of the individual pipes.
This organ (like most around the 900s)
 did not seem to have been
used for music so much as to amaze
and shock the crowd and entice them
into attending church services.
By the 12th century, organs had been
accepted into the church in a feat of
intellectual jiu-jitsu similar to
Thomas Aquinas' introduction of
Aristotle.  By this time the organs
clearly had worked up high air
pressure, though the steadiness
of their intonation was probably
still poor: Saint Aelred, abbot at
Rievaulx in Yorkshire, wrote
"What use, pray is this terrifying
blast from the bellows that is 
better suited to imitate the noise
of thunder than the sweetness of the
human voice..."  
This quote indicates that the organs
were now using bellows--in fact
banks of them, one for each pipe,
with serfs treading on them in time
to the music.  This would have greatly
increased air pressure, but it required
the serfs to tread in lockstep and more
to the point the air pressure would still
change over the course of a note as the
bellows emptied.  The initial higher
air pressure would, ironically, have
produced a more drastic drop in the
pitch of each note while it sounded.
Moreover, the notes could not sound
for a very long time--only as long
as it took the bellows feeding air to
that pipe to empty.
The overall effect would have been
of a set of notes which dropped in
pitch as they were sounded and
which would have had to be played
in strict robotic meter; however,
the problem of polyphony changing
the overall pitch of the organ had
been solved, and the organs of the
12th century would have sounded much
louder than that of Ktesibos.
Moreover, these 12th-century organs
still didn't have keyboards.  They
were played by ramming blocks of
wood forward and back to open up
and cut off the flow of air into each
pipe.  Given the size of the pipes,
this would have been a real workout.
Some time between the 11th century
and the 14th century, true keyboards
appeared.  These were spring-loaded,
like Ktesibos' keys.  They still had
to be bashed with the fist--but they
could now be played more musically.
Given the persistent problems
with changing pitch and lack of any
kind of real keyboard,  Pythagorean
intonation was still used into the 
12th century according to the organ-
building manuals of that period--even 
though modern keyboards had started
to evolve.
However, by the 14th century small
portable foot-pumped organs were
starting to appear. Henri Arnaut 
published the best suriviving text
on building medieval organs in
1450; around this time the single
greatest innovation in musical
technology between 100 B.C. and
1800 A.D. was introduced--the
multiple-chamber bellows.
Water-operated organs were clumsy
because they demanded a source of
water and they could only play for
a limited time; bellows were better
because they could be pumped relatively
silently (I've played some of these
portatives and you can't hear the
bellows).  
Adding a second chamber onto the bellows
produced constant air pressure.  The 
second inner chamber of the bellows had
an aperature into which air could be forced
but could exit except through the organ pipes.
Thus, even though the pressure of the primary
bellows constantly changed as it was pumped,
the secondary chamber maintained a relatively
constant air flow.
Around this time Napier also introduced the
logarithm, making possible calculations which
treated musical intervals as portions of the
octave which could be added and subtracted 
rather than as messy complex grade-school
fractions which had to be multiplied and
divided. 
These two advances had an explosive impact
on intonation.
Within a few generations of the late 1400s,
the Pythagorean intonation was no longer
in widespread use (though it was still taught
in music theory--much as 12-TET is still
universally taught today even thought modern
composers are using it less and less).  Organs
with large numbers of pipes became common.
Moreover, serfs no longer needed to tread in
strict time on sets of bellows.  By adding
a secondary chamber, all the pipes could be
connected to a single bellows and as long
as it was large enough, the air pressure
would be sufficient that no matter how
many keys were depressed (within some
reasonable limit) the overall air pressure
inside the inner chamber (after the
secondary bellows) wouldn't change.
This not only allowed composers
and performers to explore much wilder
and less regular rhythms, it also allowed
more elaborate intonational schemes
than 3-limit just, and it made possible
the exploration of complex polyphony
with many notes of stable pitch 
sounding all at once.
With more notes available on the organ
keyboard, the possibility of modulation
is correspondingly greater.  Between
the early 1500s and the middle 1700s
this increasing use of modulation by
composers would have made various
meantone systems particularly popular.
Indeed, Mark LIndley claims that the
early English virginal piece "Ut, Re,
Mi, Fa, Sol, La" by John Bull (written
in the late 1500s) used 1/3-comma
meantone.  Bull was a wild-eyed
avant garde composer, the Stockhausen
of his time, and this sounds reasonable
given Bull's penchant for pushing the
outside of the musical envelope.
The next post concludes this examination
of technology's effect on tuning.
--mclaren


Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Thu, 14 Nov 1996 18:24 +0100
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA08898; Thu, 14 Nov 1996 18:25:54 +0100
Received: from eartha.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA08919
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <manuel.op.de.coul@ezh.nl> id JAA08110; Thu, 14 Nov 1996 09:25:47 -0800
Date: Thu, 14 Nov 1996 09:25:47 -0800
Message-Id: <83961114165538/0005695065PK3EM@MCIMAIL.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu