source file: mills2.txt
Date: Tue, 17 Oct 1995 08:40:51 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & psychoacoustics - post 22 of 25
 
---
In the course of this series of posts much experimental evidence has been 
reviewed.  Forum subscribers open-minded enough to have read the original 
references now understand the degree of contradiction and complexity 
which attends the human auditory system.
As we've seen, the evidence offered by psychoacoustic research is not 
simple and straightforward.  Some results conflict,  and others support 
none of the three accepted models of human hearing.
There is, however, a preponderance of evidence to support a number of basic 
conclusions about the ear/brain system:
The fact that different aspects of the ear/brain's sound processing function 
are evoked by different experiments opens up the likelihood that at least 3 
different ear/brain systems operate to process sound.  Wever (1964) was 
the first to suggest that more than one mechanism exists to process sound; 
von Bekesy strongly implies this conclusion in his 1966 paper. Plomp (1967) 
strongly disagrees, but gives no basis for his objection. Pickles (1989) 
points out that "the best support for [this] view is the rather negative
one that the evidence in favour of either of the other two [place and
periodicity] theories is not conclusive, and this may be a function of
the quality of the evidence available, rather than of the acutal operation
of the auditory system." [Pickles, James O., "An Introduction to the
Phsyiology of Hearing," Academic Press, 2nd ed., 1988, pg. 277]
The leading candidates for different mechanisms for detecting pitch and 
processing sounds, they are: [1] the Fourier analyzer action of the 
basilar membrane; [2] the  encoding of pitch and spectral content by 
repetition rate of neurons firing  along the auditory nerve; [3] the 
combination of received neural impulses in medullar and higher brain 
areas and the consequent active feedback pathway between the Sylvian 
fissure, the superior medial nucleus, and the different classes of neurons 
in the primary, secondary and third- and fourth-order nerve fibers of 
the auditory nerve.
What does this imply?
First, the role of learning and the possible conflict twixt periodicity and 
Fourier analysis makes it clear that "the pitch of musical sounds is not 
directly proportional to the logarithm of the frequency and is probably 
complexly conditioned."  [Corso, J.F. "Scale Position and Performed Musical 
Octaves," Journal of Psychology, Vol. 37, 1954] This renders suspect tuning 
theories which ascribe absolute and invariant qualities to this or that 
scale  degree or interval.  Instead, pitch and  intervallic quality appear 
to be  storngly influenced by musical context, as well as by the overtone 
content of the intervals.
This conclusion would tend to support all three tunings equally, depending 
on musical context, and learning: just intonation, equal temperament, and 
non-just non-equal-tempered tunings are all equally supported by the 
brain's learned sound processing capacities.
With instruments using strictly harmonic spectra, this conclusion weakly 
supports the use of just intonation tuning--weakly, because of the 
important role of learned response in the ear/brain system.   For 
instruments which do not use strictly harmonis spsectra, non-just non-
equal-tempered systems are weakly supported: this conclusion does not 
support use of equal temperament except insofar as education and 
acculturation can sufficiently indoctrinate listeners into accepting that 
tuning.
Second, from Plomp and Levelt's and Kameoka and Kuriyagawa's work it is 
clear that the roughness or sharpness of musical intervals is largely 
determined by proximity of individual overtones with the critical band for 
that frequency range.
It is also clear from Mathews', Pierce's, Geary's, Sethares' and Dashow's 
work that timbres can be matched to tunings using digital technology so as 
to precisely control the degree of audible roughness or smoothness within 
the intervals of the scale.
However, it is less clear from the psychoacoustic evidence that audible 
roughness and sharpness of musical intervals equates with "consonance" and 
"dissonance," much less with the more sophisticated quality of 
"concordance" and  "discordance" put forward by Easley Blackwood.
Much of the music-theory literature on consonance and dissonance merely 
redefines those terms to favor the author's chosen list of references. By 
redefining consonance as "beats," just intonation emerges as the preferred 
tuning; by redefining consonance as "roughness," the periodicity theory is 
favored with the proviso that the partials of the overtones be warped to fit 
the tuning (so that all the partials share sub- and super-multiples of the 
same periodicity); and if consonance is redefined as "learned preference," or 
"experimental results of interval preference," non-just non-equal-tempered 
tuning emerges as the "best" tuning based on the empirical evidence of 
preference for stretched non-just non-equal-tempered intervals.
A good example of this process can be found in the following quote from 
Plomp:
"In conclusion, Helmholtz's theory, stating that the degree of dissonance is 
determined by the roughness of rapid beats, is confirmed. It appears that 
maximal and minimal roughness are related to critical bandwidth..." [Plomp, 
"Experiments on the Tone Sensation," 1967, pg. 58] By discussing only 
harmonic tones and by defining dissonance as "the roughness of rapid beats," 
just intonation emerges as the de facto winner.
A different set of assumptions produces an entirely different conclusion.  
For example, Risset's composition Inharmonique is based on inharmonic 
tones which also exhibit a lack of "roughness of rapid beats."  Thus Risset's 
harmonic practices would appear to be equally acceptable according to 
Plomp's definitions, yet Risset's composition does not employ small-integer 
ratios--but the compositions still exhibits marked examples of dissonance 
and consonance.
Moreover, musical intervals are often not heard as isolated units: "there is 
considerable evidence that melodies are perceived as *gestalts * or 
patterns, rather than as a seuccession of individual intervals, and that 
interval magnitude is only a small factor in the total percept." [Burns., 
E.M.,  and Ward, W.D., "Intervals, Scales and Tuning," in "The Psychology 
of Music," ed. Diana Deutsch, 1982, pg. 264] 
As Plomp points out, "A clear relationship exists between these data, 
justifying the conclusion that consonance is closely related to the absence 
of (rapid) beats, as in Helmholtz's theory.  The critical-bandwidth curve 
fits the data rather well." [Plomp, "Experiments In the Tone Sensation," 
1967, pg. 58]
Thus, while the psychoacoustic evidence on "roughness" and "smoothness" of 
musical intervals is clear, the musical imlications are less 
striaghtforward.  As von Bekesy points out, "...linearity can be assumed of 
the mechanical part of the [auditory] stimulation; but from a physiological 
point of view, the question of linearity in the nervous system is still  
open to speculation." [von Bekesy, G., "Hearing Theories and Complex 
Sounds," Journ. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 35, No. 4, 1963, pg. 588]
Although "beats" are castigated by one group of theorists and used as the 
justification for one set of tuning theories, strong evidence exists that a 
beat rate of 6 to 7 Hz adds to the perceived musicality of a performance.  
This is true of both non-Western and Western music:  "Even a cursory 
acquaintance with the sound of a Balinese gamelan uncovers some puzzling 
aspects of musical timbre.  The beating complex that is the result of all 
the beats produced in the gamelan, and especially dependent upon the beats 
of paired metallophones, resembles in its effect the quality of a string, 
woodwind or brass section in a Western orchestra.  (...) It appears that 
some type of pulsation at rates between 6 and 7 times per second -- and 
slightly irregular -- is musically desirable, both in Bali and in the West, 
that the effects of beats and the effects of vibrato are similar so far as 
the quality of richness is concerned, and that the unfiication of hte 
sound (section sound) can be accomlished with either technique." [Erickson, 
R., "Timbre and the Tuning of the Balinese Gamelan," Soundings, 1984, 
pg. 100]
In fact the argument for this or that tuning according to beat rate  is not 
supported by the psychoacoustic data, except insofar as the data strongly 
support a universal preference for low-level beats in the 6-7 Hz region.
The ability of the ear to extract individual components from complex 
sounds, however, argues strongly in favor of just intonation.
JI tunings are the only tunings which accord with the ear's Fourier 
analysis mechanism.
It is, however, clear that Fourier analysis is only one method used by the 
ear to process sounds, and in many situations it is the least important 
system. Both Plomp & Levelt's and Kameoka and Kuriyagawa's findings strongly 
support all three general kinds of tunings, provided that the overtones of 
the individual partials of the notes are matched to the scale as suggested 
by Sethares, Risset, Pierce and McLaren.
We've seen from Shepard's and Risset's auditory illusions and from Wessel's 
streaming phenomenon that all 3 ear/brain systems of pitch processing 
interact; sometimes they conflict.  This provides opportunities for 
composition using digital media, and tends to support non-just non-equal-
tempered tunings (albeit weakly).
At first glance, the surprising and universal human preference for stretched 
intervals, including a stretched octave of between 1210 and 1215 cents on 
average, strongly favors non-just non-equal-tempered scales. 
However Terhardt has brought forth convincing evidence that much of this 
effect is due to learning: and in that case, since any musical tuning can be 
learned, all three tunings are supported by this body of evidence to the 
degree that acculturation is involved.
The wide variability of interval size in live concerts by expert performers 
tends to support this concludion; however Terhardt's findings in comparing 
stretched, compressed and equal-tempered tunings found a differential 
preference for all three types of tunings--depending on context.
This evidence gives superiority to either equal-tempered, stretched or 
compressed tunings, depending on whether harmony or melody predominates.
The body of psychoacoustic evidence as a whole clearly shows a difference 
between the size of preferred melodic and harmonic intervals called by the 
same name; this also provides strong evidence for categorical perception of 
musical intervals, which in turn tends to vitiate the superiority of any 
given tuning.  If, once learned, an interval can be recogtnized even though 
significantly altered in size, then many different tunings should prove 
equally musical and effective provided that Rothenberg's properiety criteria 
are observed.
The experiments also show a clear dichotomy between the preferred size of 
vertical intervals and sequential intervals. Both preferred interval sizes 
as measured in adjustment tests are significantly larger than small-integer 
ratios predicted by conventional Western theory, but the sequential 
intervals heard as "true thirds," "true fifths," "true octaves," etc. are 
even wider than the already winder-than-just vertical intervals.  This body 
of data strongly supports the use of non-just non-equal-tempered tunings, 
inasmuch as the psychoacoustic data support neither a preference for 
tempered nor just intervals. 
Lastly, the limitations on the applicability of the Fourier transform do 
not argue against just intoantion or for any other tuning, since the FFT is 
entirely appropriate for strictly harmonic sounds; however an awareness of 
the limitations of the FFT as a tool for explaining and analyzing musical 
sounds serves as a warning against generalizing the results of this or that 
psychoacoustic experiment beyond its proper range.  
Thus the data is mixed and, as promised, there exists considerable 
psychoacoustic evidence to support each major type of tuning, as well as a 
significant body of findings which tend to *refute * the arguments for each 
particular tuning.
To date, the psychoacoustic data amassed by various researchers has been 
considered as though it were a perfect array of unbiased results.  However, 
all the major psychoacoustic researchers have exhibited strong biases 
toward this or that particular tuning philosophy.  In some cases this 
muiscal bias  had little effect on the conclusions they chose to draw from 
their data; in other cases, these researchers deliberately buried or 
ignored results which did not conform to their tuning prejudices.  
The next post will examine in detail the biases of each major reseracher,
and the degree to which it warped his conclusions.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Tue, 17 Oct 1995 18:17 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id JAA08685; Tue, 17 Oct 1995 09:16:38 -0700
Date: Tue, 17 Oct 1995 09:16:38 -0700
Message-Id: <Pine.SOL.3.91.951017110431.9413A-100000@library>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu