source file: mills2.txt
Date: Thu, 13 Feb 1997 21:52:20 -0800

Subject: Re: Triadic or tetradic infill?

From: Matt Nathan <mattn@ix.netcom.com>

I was rereading old messages.

Daniel Wolf wrote about "Triadic or tetradic infill?":

> Another possiblity - and one purely from an intonational standpoint - is
> that the ET approximation is bad enough to shove the seventh into a
> _dissonant_ category and to demand resolution. In this case, however, the
> resolutions of seventh chords occuring in real, existing Just intoned
> musics - chorales or Barbershop quartets - retain the avoidance of sevenths
> in final chords (except for special effects). Is this just conditioning
> from the the familiar temperament? 

[separated for emphasis]

> Does anyone know of a way to test this?

Here's sort of a way:

One of the science fiction stories which most disturbed me (you
might want to skip reading it) was about a guy born 
into a society which kept track of the genetic 
lineages and predispositions of its members, 
and occasionally, when a chid was born with the 
potential to become a composer (or other artist) of significance,
the child was removed from the others and most of their cultural
influence, and raised in a separate dwelling, tended to only by remote 
control. In the dwelling of this one child was placed an instrument 
designed with the potential to produce an almost limitless range of 
timbres and tunings, and to be easily programmable. 

As this child grew, he discovered
the instrument and began playing around on it with no external 
guidance and no preconceived notions of what it was or what
should be done with it. As the child began to produce completely
original unique inspired music, the rest of the society 
voyeuristically and vicariously fed off of his captive talents.

Human nature being what it is, such captive artists often
succumbed to deep loneliness with no understanding of what
or why it was. Some would eventually stop producing and
pass into a sort of living death. Occasionally, a rare 
one would find the imagination to suppose that there were
something beyond the small world he knew and would effect escape.
The child in the story is one such person. As a young man,
he escapes. After wandering dissoriented and with no idea
of how to meet his own basic needs, he ends up in some local 
bar where an old out of tune acoustic piano collects dust in 
the corner. The young man sees people, but doesn't know how
to relate to them or perhaps even what they are. They 
don't recognize him and after their initial greetings are met 
with a confused stare from the young man think him 
an idiot, and leave him alone. He 
finds the piano, and begins plunking all the notes. He 
quickly learns what all the (out of tune) pitches are and
begings playing them in such a way as to make the people in
the bar turn around and be mesmerized by such unusual and
acute beauty. Some of them start to cry without knowing why.

He wanders more. With each hour on the outside, impressions
from radios and other raw noise of the culture begins to 
change him. 

Soon, his absence from the dwelling is noticed and he is
persued and caught and returned to his old small world. 
His brief experience outside has infected his creativity.
People listening in notice strains of familiar melodies
creeping into his improvisations, imitations of vehicle
sounds, and other recognizable noises. 

I think he escapes one more time and is caught again. 

His priceless 
purity of imagination is tainted. Being polluted beyond any 
hope of being cleansed, his music has become too ugly to listen 
to. The travesty of must stop. He must be punished for 
escaping and prevented from producing any more ugliness.
They cut off his hands. 

[I know, and I'm sorry. I didn't write it, I just paraphrased it. It 
originally appeared in Omni magazine, issue and author forgotten.]

Matt Nathan

Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 14 Feb 1997 07:15 +0100
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA06126; Fri, 14 Feb 1997 07:15:20 +0100
Received: from ella.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA06123
Received: from  by ella.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	 id WAA17204; Thu, 13 Feb 1997 22:13:42 -0800
Date: Thu, 13 Feb 1997 22:13:42 -0800
Message-Id: <memo.408008@cix.compulink.co.uk>
Errors-To: madole@mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@ella.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@ella.mills.edu