source file: m1483.txt
Date: Fri, 24 Jul 1998 14:13:08 +0000

Subject: xen wind instruments

From: "Patrick Ozzard-Low" <patrick.ozzard-low.itex@norfolk.gov.uk>

Drew Skyfyre wrote:

> >From what I understand, many players achieve different tunings
> by using various fingerings. From this list, I know this has been
> done on flute and bassoon. To which other wind instruments has this
> approach been applied ? And, what types of tunings are possible ?

> Is there a good source of info out there for someone wanting
> to write parts for these instruments ? Though ultimately it would 
> require personally working with the people who are to actually 
> perform the parts, to fine tune the writing to match their actual
> physical abilities. 

Sorry not to have time for more detailed help right now. 

Here are some sources:

Pitch: for the International Microtonalist, Vol. 1, No. 4, Spring
1990. 

Microtonality Manual, co-produced by  the Centre for Microtonal
Music and the SPNM (Society for the Promotion of New Music, London), 
July 1991

Robert Dick, The Other Flute - A Performance Manual of Contemporary 
Techniques, Multiple Breath Music Company, 1989;

Thomas Howell, The Avant-Garde Flute: A Handbook for Composers and 
Flutists, Berkeley, University of California Press, 1974; 

Peter Veale, et al., The Techniques of Oboe Playing: A Compendium 
with Additional Remarks on the Oboe d'Amore and the Cor Anglais, 
B=E4renreiter, 1995;  

Philip Rehfeldt, New Directions for the Clarinet, University of 
California Press, 1994;  

Gerald James Farmer, Multiphonics and other Contemporary Clarinet 
Techniques, Rochester, New York, Shall-u-mo Publications, 1982. 

 The issue of Pitch - gives an extensive list of special fingerings 
for orchestral woodwinds (also the recorder and horn) covering a 
number of alternative tunings - including just intonations, 
quarter-tones, and even 31-ET and 72-ET for some instruments.  Johnny 
Reinhard will surely tell you more.

The orger references are not just about alternative tunings.  Where 
they are, there is an emphasis on quarter-tones in each of these 
manuals except Pitch.  Rehfeldt also deals with eighth-tones.

Also see my refercne to the new manualk for 1/4 tones for recorder 
posted here not long back.

Patrick O-L