source file: mills2.txt
Date: Wed, 4 Oct 1995 10:18:47 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & Psychoacoustics - Post 11 of 25
---
MYTH: "I KNOW WHAT MY EARS HEAR AND
I KNOW WHAT A 'PURE' OCTAVE, A 'PURE'
FIFTH, AND A 'PURE' THIRD IS."
FACT: Because of the phenomenon of
categorical perception, none of us know
we actually hear--as opposed to what
our ear/brain system brainwashes us
into *believing* we hear.  The only way to
actually *determine* what you're
hearing (rather than what you *think*
you're hearing) is to use double-blind
psychoacoustic tests.
Until 1969, such tests were seldom
used.  Computers were unheard-of;
and prior to computer-generated
psychoacoustic test tones, the only
available readily controllable test
tones were those generated by analog
circuits whose frequency drifted 
by significant amounts as the temperature
of the sound-generating circuit changed.
As a result, ignorance of the
ear/brain system's behaviour was
near-absolute prior to Max Mathews'
creation of the acoustic compiler in 1959.
As a result of Mathews' innovation, many
surprising properties were discovered in
the ear/brain system.
One of the most surprising of these properties
is known as "categorical perception."
---
The phenomenon of categorical perception
is familiar to linguists.  
Everyone pronounces phonemes,
vowels, and consonants slightly differently--
and in different regional dialects the 
sound of a word may be entirely
transformed.  In New England, "pahk my cah,"
in the MidWest, "park my car," down south,
"purk m' cuhr."  The ear/brain system 
has a learned mechanism for dealing with
these differences--different sounds are
heard as the same semantic unit.  This
ear/brain system of learned categorization
is known as categorical perception, and it
operates so efficiently that people in a given
region of the country cannot even "hear" their
own accent.  As far as they can tell, they're
speaking "standard English"--everyone else is
slurring or pinching or warping their words "with
 some strange kind of accent."
Categorical perception has been proven to 
operate in the perception of musical sounds, 
and it gives rise to many of the same distortions
 of the auditory system.
In the paper "Categorical Perception--Phenomenon
or Epiphenomenon: Evidence from experiments in
the perception of melodic musical intervals,"
by E. M. Burns and W. D. Ward [JASA, vol. 63, No. 2, 
1978, pp. 456-468], the authors point out:
"An experiment on the perception of melodic
intervals by musically untrained observers
showed no evidence for the existence of
"natural" categories for musical intervals."
The authors also found that for trained
musicians "musical intervals are also
rather unique in that musicians are able to
perfectly identify more than 30 categories
of musical intervals..."  These results
strongly contradict both the standard 12-tone
dogma that only the intervals of the 12-TET
scale are recognizable or musically 
significant; and the standard "natural
interval" dogma which holds that some
musical intervals are [fill in your own
preferred propaganda] "natural," "pure," 
"preferred," "rational," etc.  
Among other interesting conclusions, Ward
and Burns found that "The average difference
limen (based on the 75% correct
points from the psychometric functions)
for three subjects at the physical octave
was 16 cents. The DL's at other ratios in the
civicinity of the octave were not 
significantly different. A DL of 16 cents is in
good agreement with the DL estimated from the 
from the standard deviation of repeated
adjustments of sequential octaves (about 10
cents) in the same frequency region found by
Ward (1954). (...) As in Moran and Pratt's
experiment, large differences were found for
DL's at different ratios, but the range of 
DL's (14-25 cents) was in good agreement
with their results." [Burns, E. M. and Ward,
W.D.,  JASA, 63(2), Feb. 1978, pg. 456]
This preference for stretched as
opposed to purportedly "natural" intervals
is not a new discovery.  As will be seen
in the post after this one, the preference
for stretched vertical intervals--and for 
significantly *wider* melodic than
vertical intervals--was discovered by
the very first researchers who 
investigated the operation of the
ear/brain system.
What are the implications of these particular
psychoacoustic data for tuning and music?
First, these data explain clearly and convincingly
why there are so many different tunings systems
and timbres used in the various musics of cultures
throughout the world.  Because of the influence of
categorical perception and the implied importance
of learned response on the ear/brain system, any
system of pitches can be learned as "preferred"
by the ear.  Thus a Mongolian Buddhist using the r-gynd-stad
tuning can with equal justification claim that the pitches
of his musical system enjoy a privileged status in the
ear/brain sytem as can Javanese gamelan performer.
According to the psychoacoustic results adduced above,
both musicians are correct--because the cultures in
which their pitch preferences were formed characterize
those particular pitches as "special."  And because of the
known effects of learned response and categorical perception,
a wide variety of pitches can equally be perceived as
"special" or "uniquely privileged."
These psychoacoustic data would also tend to support current
Western musical practices, at least to the extent that the Western
12-tone tuning system is acculturated into Wesern musicians
and composers, and to which Western performers and audiences
perceive departures from those pitches as falling within the 
range of variability which (as Moran and Pratt point out) characterize 
all pitches.
Categorical perception strongly favors all three classes of tuning--
just intonation, equal temperament and non-just non-equal tunings--
since once the pitches are learned and perceived as "special" or
"privileged" both audience and performers strongly tend to
perceive departures from those pitches as "ornamental," if
indeed the departures are heard as different pitches at all. If
these psychoacoustic results are accurate, all tuning systems
are self-reinforcing feedback systems, with "errors" heard as
slight variations of base pitches (as in the case of Jaipongan,
where slendro or pelog are used as base scales for ornamental
extra-scalar variations, or as in the various sruti of East Indian
practice, where the remaining 22 pitches are used as ornamental
extra-modal variational pitches, or as in the vocal inflexions  of 
Sinead O'Conner, Louis Armstrong or Ella Fitzgerlad, all of whom consistently range microtonally outside the 12-tone equal tempered 
scale in which their song purports to reside).
The next post will consider the effects of possible interactions
between the various ear/brain processes discussed to date,
and the evidence for such interactions, along with the implications
for tuning and music.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Thu, 5 Oct 1995 21:58 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id MAA22353; Thu, 5 Oct 1995 12:58:04 -0700
Date: Thu, 5 Oct 1995 12:58:04 -0700
Message-Id:  <9510051256.aa03198@cyber.cyber.net>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu