source file: m1389.txt
Date: Sat, 18 Apr 1998 07:13:29 -0500 (CDT)

Subject: ASR-X:  What is it, REALLY?

From: mr88cet@texas.net (Gary Morrison)

I was interested in the ASR-X, in part because it supports the MIDI
tuning standard, and even has my current tuning interest built in.  That,
however, was until I started reading about it in my back issues of the
Transoniq Hacker.

   It sounded at first like it could perhaps be used as a nice little
hideaway (with a lot more RAM) to dump a lot of my ASR-10 sounds into.
That in the sense that I could edit them and get them right on my keyboard
ASR-10 unit, and then copy them over as needed to the ASR-X to fill in the
rest of the MIDI channels that my ASR-10 won't handle.

   But after reading about it in the 'Hacker, it sounds more like little
more than the world's most incredible thumpa-thumpa box!  Here is a quotes
from Ensoniq's announcement:

    "We went to the masters of sampling and asked them to list the top
     features they would like to see in the ultimate groove machine. They
     said to make it easy to sample, resample, and loop, include a
     built-in synth, add some incredible effects, resonant filters, an
     easy to use sequencer and put it all into a portable box with pads.
     We did all that and much more..."

And here's a quote from a later review of the ASR-X:

    "The X has a bunch of ROM sounds, about 200. Most are percussive
     sounds. The intention of the X is Groove Station - which is a drum
     machine PLUS."

  and

    "Again, if you are a dance artist or the like (please - don't make me
     list the different type labels like rap, hip-hop, rave, etc.) - get
     the X NOW. I mean right now. It stomps all over its competition.
     However, if you want to extend the X beyond its niche and want it to
     do full brass sections, pianos, bagpipes (yes), complex synth sounds,
     I'd wait to see what the coming update does."

It definitely doesn't sound like a machine built for symphonic works!

   But based upon its specs alone, it doesn't sound like there's any really
clear reason, other than perhaps its built-in sounds and the fact that it
doesn't have a keyboard of its own (no problem there), that it has to be
limited that pop music.

   Anybody have any experience with it?