source file: mills2.txt
Date: Wed, 8 Nov 1995 20:50:30 -0800

Subject: Re: what is JI music?

From: Gary Morrison <71670.2576@compuserve.com>

The history of music is full of people trying to absolutize relative
measures.  There's no doubt that the 4:5:6:7 version of a dominant seventh chord
is more dissonant than a 4:5:6 major triad.  Is the reduction of tension from
that JI progression enough less than its nearest 12TET equivalent to make it
unusable?  I have not found that to be the case at all, but there's no absolute
threshold here.  

   To me though, that sort of a matter-of-degree question ultimately has only
limited value.  For example, in sustained chords, there is definite musical
meaning to the cleanliness of beatless JI harmonies.  But when you really get
down to it, just how big a deal is that?  And how often are chords sustained
long enough, and rendered at high enough precision, and in harmonic enough
timbres to tell the result from, say, quarter-comma meantone?  

   Don't get me wrong; of course the precise character of how a new tuning
renders existing resources is certainly important.  But it's not as important,
in my view, as what all-new resources it offers.

   From a harmonic perspective, I find it pretty obvious from my recent work
that subminor, neutral, and supramajor thirds provide very powerful new musical
possibilities.  From a hybrid melodic-harmonic perspective, I find that
wandering tonics provide a surprising nontraditional effect.  From a melodic
perspective, it's pretty obvious that microtonal melodic steps give sensations
from ominous to humorous to irritating.  Certainly they have very big effects on
counterpoint as well.

   But getting away from the mechanics, you pointed out that these new effects
were not readily accepted in this case.  Perhaps the most common reason why our
audiences wouldn't understand these new effects is that we don't either!
Millions of peole have spent thousands of years figuring out what to do with
what we now call traditional resources.  Just how realistic is it to think that
a handful of people - many of whom are not professional musicians - can find
equally powerful ways to use these new resources in a few decades?  

   And, even if we can, is the idea that these new musical sensations are not
always understood really all that surprising?  Ultimately the musical experience
is much deeper when we use these new possibilities, but people have a natural
tendency to panic when faced with the unusual.  

   As I pointed out shortly after I joined the tuning list - wow, nearly two
years ago it seems! - xenharmonic composers have to be triathletes.  Most of us
on the tuning list will listen to microtonal music for that reason alone, but
that's not true of audiences in general.  Our music has to be appealing for all
of the usual reasons as well as showcasing new and unusual reasons to be
appealing.  

   Many have pointed out that being a 20th century composer is difficult because
music of the huge variety of styles is so readily and simultaneously available
on radio and CDs.  With so many types to cast it to, it's easier for people to
think of it as "kind of like this composer or that composition", rather than
something interesting in its own right.  Xenharmonic ideas can help a lot in
that regard, because they can make our music sound totally different from the
start.  

   But then we run into the other problem that this wide availability of music
causes:  Overload.  People hear so damned much music all around them, that we're
down to trying to DISCARD music, rather than mining a rare gem of song from a
lute-wielding troubadour wandering through your village.  Our music has to
brilliant and appealing for reasons other than the unusual tuning, and that's
just terribly difficult to do.  Fun and rewarding, yes, but unequivocally
difficult.  

   Still there certainly are plenty of success stories, so take heart in them
too.  We all can learn a lot from the ultimate successes Harry Partch, Ivor
Darreg, Other Music, Ben Johnston, and many others.  And perhaps more
impressively, the live performers among us.  Johnny Reinhard and his troops have
produced many years of microtonal concerts, most very well accepted.  And more
recently it seems like hardly a week goes by without Neil Haverstick reporting a
case of audiences enjoying the heck out of his gigs.  

   So, to oversummarize, we're taking on a difficult task here, so success
depends on focusing on the right aspects of the task, and presenting the focused
image in a way that audiences can relate.  


Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Thu, 9 Nov 1995 06:53 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id UAA27566; Wed, 8 Nov 1995 20:53:43 -0800
Date: Wed, 8 Nov 1995 20:53:43 -0800
Message-Id: <v01530501acc7382a32b9@[199.212.154.44]>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu