source file: mills2.txt
Date: Thu, 4 Jan 1996 08:23:26 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Paul Rapoport's article 
"The Notation of Equal Temperaments"
---
Xenharmonikon 16, available now from Frog Peak
Music or from John Chalmers, contains Paul's
latest essay on non-12 notation.
This is a subject littered with caltrops. To date, no
one has succeeded in producing a universal notation
which allows both easy performance AND analysis 
of xenharmonic music.
Nonetheless, Paul makes many good points in 
this article.
"Despite the considerable history of ETs, few
theorists have studied their properties or created
musical notations for them systematically.  Because
most of the ad hoc solutions in notation of one ET
do not extend easily to many other ETs, such solutions
obscure similarities in related temperaments."
[Rapoport, P., XH 16, pg. 61]
However, the worm soon munches its way free of the
apple: "This article explores almost exclusively ETs
of the octave and implications based on harmonics
no higher than 5."
The implicit presumption? That one ought to strive for 
a unified system of notation which relates all the
especially 12-like tunings with good fifths.
While this is a laudable goal, one needs must ask:
why spend so much effort on the 12-like tunings?
By far the most interesting equal temperaments
are those which have *little or nothing* in common with
traditional Pythagorean and 5-limit tunings.  There
exist many oddball equal temperaments which
cannot be notated usefully by a 5-limit scheme,
yet whose "sound" compels ever-growing interest.
In this regard, 9-TET, 10-TET, 23-TET, 22-TET
and 21-TET stand out in particular.
9-TET, for example, violently abjures traditional notation,
yet it remains an endlessly fertile breeding ground
for xenharmonic compositions. In fact Erv Wilson has
called it one of his favorite tunings.
Paul derives several guiding principles:
[1] Additional signs must be perceptually distinct
from one another.
[2] Notation must reflect the determined nature of
the termperament.  If there's more than one
way of deriving the temperament, there should 
be more than one way of notating it.
[3] Additional signs beyond bb X, etc, should be
created for kommata representing the differences
in pairs of multiples of just intervals.
The first 2 points are eminently sensible. 
Point 3 seems incomprehensible to me.  If you're
going to relate your equal temperament explicitly to 
just intonation via the notation used, you might as
well abandon equal temperament and go straight to
just intonation.  Few equal temperaments < 48 are awfully
JI-like, and all of 'em contain internal structures 
which inevitably frustrate the attempt to view
them as this or that outgrowth of just intonation.
As a result, many of the intervals which Paul 
defines as "kommata" do not function as such in 
equal temperaments below 48-TET. For instance, in 22-TET
a single scale-step is numerically a fair approximation
of the Pythagorean komma, but it does NOT REMOTELY
function like a just interval in context.(Significantly,
Paul does not discuss 22-TET.)
Again, the 1/17 octave interval in 17-TET, while
numerically near-indistinguishable from the 
difference twixt the 6/5 and the 5/4, sounds in
practice like a semitone.   In an actual 17-TET
composition, this interval contains NO audible 
implications of just intonation whatever.
31-TET contains an interval quite close to the
41.059 cent "diesis," yet a single scale-step of
31 conjures up no auditory ghost of just
intonation.  In fast chromatic runs,  the 31-TET
scale-step functions like a very strange semitone,
and when used as a passing-tone twixt chords 
its function is a somewhat small chromatic
passing-tone.
The idea of imposing on any but a few ETs with very
good fifths (all > 48, 46, 43, 41, 39, 37, 36, 34, 
31, 29, 24, 19, 17, 12) a set of just kommata purporting
to represent the substructure of the tuning
seems suspect to me.  Many intervals numerically
close to JI kommata do not function as such
such in the context of the equal tempered scales below

48-TET, and the futile attempt to force them to do so 

produces mediocre music.  
Examples of such music include some of Easley 
Blackwood's "Twelve Microtonal Etudes For Electronic
 Music Media," a project only partially successful. 
The etudes which hew most closely to Blackwood's
theoretical and notational principles prove LEAST
successful as music: in particular, 17-TET, 16-TET,
19-TET and 20-TET.  Blackwood jams 19-TET into a
12/oct straitjacket, and his 19-tone etude
suffers greatly from his refusal to showcase 19's
exotic non-Pythagorean intervals.
In the 16-TET etude, Blackwood derives an awkward
pseudo-tonal mode which goes against the inherently
anti-tonal, non-cadential grain of the tuning,
and the result sounds bad. The 17-TET etude suffers 
grievously from Blackwood's unwillingness to recognize
& use the 5-unit neutral third as the ONLY functional
triadic third, while the 20-TET etude is mangled 
by Blackwood's relentless insistence on generating
diatonic modes from 20/oct, rather than exploiting its
intercessant circles of NON-diatonic pentatonic 5ths
(as he did in 15-TET).
All of these problems stem from Blackwood's
doomed attempt to extend 12-like structures
into entirely xenharmonic tunings. He could have
avoided these faux pas if he'd ignored his
Pythagorean notational kommatic calculations and 
relied on his ear instead of v, a, k, t and p.
To put it succinctly, Easley Blackwood concentrated
far too much on the "harmonic" and far too little
on the "xen" aspects of these xenharmonic scales.
By contrast, those etudes in which Blackwood 
pretty much tossed out his theories and just sort 
of gave up & winged it seem by FAR the most successful
 musically: 13-TET, 23-TET, 14-TET.
Moreover:
In calling Blackwood's project "the most substantial
non-improvised recorded project in different
equal temperaments," Paul renders a decidedly
 peculiar definition of "notation."  Most of us would
argue that William Schottstaedt's and Jean-Claude
Risset's and James Dashow's and John Chowning's
and Richard Karpen's and Richard Boulanger's 
computer compositions are FULLY notated...they
simply use a notation radically at odds with Paul's
cherished Pythagorean common-practice-period-based
paradigm. 
Moreover, my own MIDI compositions and those of 
many other xenharmonic composers use a notation
which is also perfectly standardized, entirely
reproducible, and which allows others to examine
and analyze the compositions--we use the MIDI
file format in which notes are represented as numbers
from 0 to 127.  Again, presumably because this
notation is something that Beethoven wouldn't have
used, somehow our compositions don't exist and
aren't worthy of audition, analysis or (presumably)
mention.
Peculiar indeed.
This leaves aside, of course, algorithmically
composed xenharmonic music.  That's a whole 'nother
passel o' varmints, chilluns.
Yet all the pieces of music mentioned above are carefully
and painstakingly composed, note by note, with *AT
LEAST* as much attention to detail as shown in 
Blackwood's scores.  The main difference is not
that "many such [electronic/computer music] works
are created without a score," but rather that they use
musical scores which Paul chooses *NOT* to recognize 
as a valid symbology.
Thus, while Paul mentions "this article does not 
address the issue of the utility of scores," it ALSO
(much more glaringly) does not address the issue of
whether a piece of carefully-composed, closely-
worked-out music notated in a completely untraditional
way (e.g., Csound .sco file or MIDI file) ought to be
treated as though it doesn't exist merely because
the notation cannot be viewed as a variant of
some 19th-century central European concoction.
(Slippery slope time: do Gregorian chants notated
with neumes qualify as musical scores?  If so, why 
don't MIDI files printed out in piano-roll notation?
And why aren't sonograms of Risset's and Chowning's
and Dashow's and Schottstaedt's and Lanksy's 
computer music pieces *also* scores?  ...We're on the
slippery slope, and it's gettin' slipperier by the minute...
In desperation,  one MIGHT claim that 19th century musical
scores allow acoustic performers to reproduce the music.
This (such logic goes) distinguishes them from MIDI
files or Csound .sco files.
But how many live acoustic xenharmonic concerts did
YOU attend last year?  And didn't ALL of 'em use one-of-
a-kind exotic homebuilt acoustic microtonal instruments?
So what good is a 19th-century-type score if there's only
one set of microtonal instruments in the world that 
can play 'em?
..Slippery slope time, kiddies!  Let's face it: 
essentially no one attends or gives live acoustic 
concerts any more, and since 99.999999% of the music we
all hear is now delivered via electronic media, this is
a VERY weak and flabby and etiolated argument for ANY 
particular flavor of musical notation.) 
Paul's chart of kommata is admirably clear and his
ranking exemplary; he is probably right that,
for ETs with good fifths, the syntonic komma is
most important for quasi-19th-century notation.
Paul makes a good point in dealing with 17:
"the third in question (5 u) happens to lie very close
to half way between the actual just major third
(386.314 cents) and just minor third (315.64 cents).
It may therefore be interpreted as either or neither,
depending on musical treatment of the temperament."
This leads to an alternate notation which does not
involve sharps or flats, and proves much superior to 
Easley Blackwood's notation for 17.   
However, those of us who've worked extensively
with 17 would go even farther--many of us would
contend that 17 has only ONE functional triadic third:
the 5-unit third.  The so-called "major" third in 17
is unbearably dissonant and useful only in melodies,
or vertically as a passing tone or a cambiata.   Thus 
many of us would urge that the so-called "major" third
 of 17 be notated as a species of fourth--since, like 
that interval, it is functionally unstable when employed
vertically.
Paul's 2nd notation of 53 seems as good as any other. 
It avoids the problem of too many flats and sharps, 
as usual by substituting odd new symbols. Again,
this eases clutter but reduces sight-readbility. New
symbols instead of the familiar sharp & flat will
always prove more ambiguous for sight-readintg,
since they're by definition unfamiliar.
Paul's first notation for 25-TET seems less than
successful, since it uses note-names E & F.
25-TET's most obvious audible characteristic is
its pentatonic "mood." This, because 25 boasts
not one but 5 circles of identical 5-TET fifths.  
The 25-TET fifth sounds unmistakably pentatonic--
it's the same 720-cent fifth found in all multiples
 of 5-TET up to 45-TET. 
Thus, a notation which implies that there are
more tones than sharped- or flatted-versions
of C, D, E, G and A proves less than useful.
Paul's 2nd proposed notation admirably corrects
this problem and exposes the five pentatonic
circles of fifths, as does Paul's third
suggested notation. This is a big improvement
over Blackwood's notation, which retained
E and F and B and C as exact enharmonic 
equivalents (talk about willful obfuscation!).
Paul also points out that even *his* generalized
notation breaks down for ETs without fifths.
As an example, he gives 13...which has certainly
resisted any attempt to force it into a traditional
notational mold.
This is inevitable.  No notation can cover all
equal temperaments.  The main question is:
where ought the notation to break down?
And how?
Curiously absent in this regard are tunings with
good fifths but absolutely no point of contact to
traditional tunings: 26-TET, 22-TET, 35-TET, etc.
Paul's treatment of 13-TET as every other note
of 26-TET strikes me as peculiar, inasmuch
as the two tunings bear not even the most remote
audible relation to one another.  Any relationship
is a purely augenmusik calculated-numbers-on-
paper sort of thing, and does not strike me as
productive.  Similarly, notating 11 as every 
other note of 22 would be equally fruitless--the 
mind can calculate, but the ear cannot hear, 
a relationship between the two.  In both cases,
one must *listen* to the tuning and *throw out* the
numbers if they conflict with common sense.
In both cases, notation for 11-TET ought to bear
NO resemblance to notation for 22, ditto
notation for 13 and 26.  If the two tunings sound
utterly different, they should be notated utterly
differently.
Perhaps Paul should add this as a 4th general
principle...?
Paul's treatment of negative kommata (33-TET)
seems eminently reasonable.  By avoiding sharps
and flats, many notational paradoxes are averted.
Of course, dispensing with sharps and flats also
eliminates much of the analytic value of a 
musical notation.  If you can't tell at a glance
whether one note is higher or lower than another,
it automatically poses problems for musical
analysis.  In this case, one might be better off
studying a printout of the MIDI note numbers, or
the Csound .sco file Hz values.  But for Paul's
purposes it is obviously better not to raise such
unsettling questions.
His treatment of 14-TET proves less satisfactory.
Alas, in 14 (as in 7-TET) the modes collapse back
into the keys.  There is no major or minor: 3
scale-steps give 257.1 cents, too small to
sound or function as a minor third, while 4
scale-steps yield 342.8 cents, a neutral 
third antithetical to Pythagorean theory. 5
units = 423.5 cents,  too large to function
as any kind of recognizable major third.
This situation proves so puzzling to devotees of 
19th-century-style symbology that it forces
the unwary notation-theorist to twist hi/rself
into knots to get out of the problem.
Notating 14 by taking every other note from 28
begs the problem.  In fact, the issue is that
14 has two circles of 7 identical fifths, whereas
28 has 4 of them, and they ALL use neutral intervals
as building-blocks.  The 2-out-of-28 dodge  
obscures this basic fact, and tends to dupe the
inexperienced xenharmonist into imagining
that 14 has something like a major or a minor
mode when in fact it has neither: merely two
overlapping neutral 7-tone scales melding into
a neutral 14-tone scale--and not a diatonic 14,
either.   Logic would indicate two simple
overlapping sets of identical A B C D E F G 
symbols.  Perhaps  A  A*  B B* C C* D D* E E*
F F* G G*? (Ivor Darrg's notation.)
This example illustrates the problems that Paul's 
generalized notation creates when there are
NO Pythagorean landmarks--in this case, because
the multiples of 7-TET up to 42-TET are constructed
from completely non-diatonic building blocks.
A Pythagorean musical paradigm fails when faced
with 7 anti-diatonic utterly equidistant tones:
it flails like a moth caught in a  searchlight.
The product of a xenharmonic notation based on 
inappropriate diatonic kommatic assumptions is bound
to falter & collapse for multiples of 7-equal.
In fairness, Paul points out the problems his notation
encounters with 50-TET, which is certainly no
surprise:  no proposed notation has dealt adroitly
with such an oddball tuning.  (Ditto 32, 27, 29, and
particularly 35, which is probably the ultimate 
nightmare from notation hell!)
Paul's introduction of numbers as superscripts is
clearly UNsuccessful.  The entire reason for using
symbols to notate notes, rather than Arabic numerals,
is that the human brain has evolved a marvellous
pattern-recognition facility which operates at vastly
greater speed than any possible number-calculation
facility.
Once memorized, symbols are instantly processed
by a huge glob of visual cortex.  Ergo, the
miracle of sight-reading.  Not so numbers.  Numeric
stuff crawls through the  forebrain, where it clogs
everything up and bogs everything down.
Thus, it is impossible to instantly sight-read
columns of numerals, whereas one can easily sight-read
and musically analyze a bunch of visually striking
symbols.
Combining numerals with symbols forces the
brain's spiffy pattern-recognition wetware to slow
down to the pace of the number-recognizing forebrain 
(a much more recent and thus less efficient evolutionary
addition), auguring ill both for the prospective 
sight-reader AND the would-be music theorist.
Paul points out that F. R. Herf's and E. Sims' 72-TET
notation is a one-off chimera, not useful for other 
temperaments.  True, alas, and typical of all too many
xenharmonic notations based on but a single tuning.
The same could be said of Joseph Yasser's 19-TET 
notation, etc.
Overall, the article is refreshing and offers
excellent insights.  While many of us would quarrel
with the issue of what constitutes notation, Paul
appears to have generally succeeded in producing
a notation flexible enough to accomodate non-weird
non-oddball equal temperaments below about 53--
or at least, those which boast good fifths.
In my judgment the "weird" tunings like 26
and 19 and 22 and 32 demand entirely separate
treatment.  Ideally, thse tunings ought to have their
OWN notations--preferably as distinct as possible
from any others.
It seems clear that sharps and flats are most useful
in those tunings which *sound* as though though they
have recognizable semitones.  Thus, use of sharps and
flats in 19 is wilfully perverse--and hellishly confusing
in 9 or 10.  There may be no way out of this conundrum.
The issue of ETs without fifths was deftly resolved
by Augusto Novaro, who simply proposed using
numbers instead of noteheads on a single staff
line.
Incidentally, by proposing a notation for 171-TET
Paul has also notated the non-octave scale Carlos
Gamma, since it is audibly identical to every 5th note
out of 171-TET.
A much larger issue is the quesion of whether 7 basic
note-names is or should be the be-all and end-all of
music notation.  Miller's article "The Magic Number Seven,
Plus or Minus Two" (J. Psychol., 1956) makes it clear that 
the human brain can efficaciously process as few as 5
or as many as 9 different note-names.  Yet there have,
to date, been almost NO suggestions for eugmenting
the basic A B C D E F G seven note names by
including up to two more--say, H and I (NOT to
be confused with the German H for "B flat").
There have also been NO discussions whatever
to my knowledge about 6-note or 8-note modes,
especially in prime-number ETs.
(How about it, Mnauel?  Any chance of your 
writing a computer program to find & list all
the 5-, 6-, 7-, 8-, and 9-note modes of every 

relatively prime ET with fifths less than 21 

cents away from 3/2, from 5/oct through 53/oct?)
Why such 12-centric thinking?
Why must ALL xenharmonic equal temperaments
employ always and only SEVEN note names?
Why must ALL xenharmonic musical modes use always
and only 5 or 7 notes?  
True, 5 and 7 are relatively prime to 12--and so what?
6 and 8 and 9 are relatively prime to 19, or 17, or
29. 
Why only 5- or 7-note modes when we move outside
of 12 tones/oct? 
Why not 6? 
Why not 8?
Why not 9?
Paul will probably take issue with some of
these points, particularly where music-theory students
analyzing pieces of xenharmonic music are concerned.
However, I would point out that so few xenharmonic
pieces of music have been composed--and so few
music students have gotten together to analyze them!--
that to date the issue remains a pie-in-the-sky
abstraction at best.
It is entirely possible that xenharmonic composition
will demand such a schismatic break with the past that
previous 19th-century notational paradigms must
be thrown out.  However, we must be wary of such 
proposals.  John Cage and other foolish folk made 
similar noises in the 50s about *their* brand
of foofaraw, and--as the magazine "The Wire" put it 
so concisely in its November 1995 issue--"John
Cage's music was intensely theoretical and centered 
around the cult of personality of John Cage, and as a 
result most of it is today unlistenable." 
Claims that "THIS musical revolution requires a COMPLETE
break with the past!" are perennial, and have never proven
true.  Thus we must view with the utmost skepticism any such
pronouncements made on behalf of microtonality.
For the moment, until this issue is resolved, Paul's article
 seems an admirable advance in the state of the art of 
microtonal notation.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 5 Jan 1996 08:43 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id XAA29081; Thu, 4 Jan 1996 23:43:23 -0800
Date: Thu, 4 Jan 1996 23:43:23 -0800
Message-Id: <01HZMVBYZ5YA9D7TAS@delphi.com>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu