source file: mills2.txt
Date: Tue, 19 Dec 1995 14:36:47 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: The dirty truth about Csound
---
Since no one has ever bothered to respond
to any of my e-mail about the problems
with Csound,  time to go public.
Around 40% of the features of Csound do
not work and appear to be unimplemented.
Most of these features deal with spectral
modification of input signals, but the delay
line features also do not work. 
One at a time, Csound's current problems are:
[1] One of the most obvious reasons to use
Csound is to analyze input timbres with
the Csound HETRO program and resynthesize
them with the partials warped into the
frequencies maximally consonant for a given
tuning.  
Naturally, HETRO does not work and Csound's
ADSYN routines does not work.  Way back
when, HETRO was written as an add-on to 
analyze input sounds with a hetrodyne filter.
It blew up if the input exceeded 32 kilobytes
in length.  The problem was inherent to the 
HETRO code, not the machine on which it ran.
Barry Vercoe fixed this problem in December
1994 but in so doing changed the format in
which HETRO stores numbers.  The old format
stored partials in pairs: frequency, amplitude,
timeslice, frequency, amplitude, timeslice...&c.
The new format uses the same data structure
but the timeslice is now variable and indicates
a detla-t in milliseconds to the next envelope
breakpoint.
In the old HETRO, the user specified the number
of breakpoints and the spectral analysis output
automatically took care of giving a spectral
"snapshot" every length/(number of breakpoints)
milliseconds.
In the new HETRO, an internal algorithm minimizes
the number of breakpoints.  This number is thus
entirely variable and the time between spectral
"snapshots" for each harmonic is unpredictable.
Alas, Csound cannot read spectral analysis files
in the new HETRO format.
This is of some concern to xenharmonists on this
tuning forum, inasmuch as one of the main areas
of interest for microtonalists working in computer
music is modifying acoustic spectra to render them 
maximally consonant in a given tuning.
Thus, the two primary routines designed to analyze 
and resynthesize Csound timbres are vaporware.
ADSYN and HETRO no longer work.
(Naturally, various forum subscribers will
deny this, and naturally they'll be--let us say--
"deliberately mistaked.") 
This is a classic example of academic garbageware,
a subject to which I shall return in future posts.
Garbageware promises wonderful results, doesn't
work, and is always undocumented and bug-ridden.
Garbageware is always written by someone with 3
PhDs as a diversion, and naturally no support is
ever available for the software, since the programmer
is now in the Arctic studying the mating habits of the
krill shrimp under the permanent ice pack.  Garbageware
always *almost* works--it does *just enough* to
tantalize the unwary user, but *never* enough to
be useful.
Naturally, no one has bothered to mention
garbageware in Computer Music Journal, ARRAY, or
anywhere else--so it's up to me (as usual).
Csound's "spectral modification" routines are
a classic example of garbageware.
If you try to use HETRO, you'll get an output
file, all right--an output file unreadable by
Csound.  (Various people will now claim this
is not so, and they'll be--let us say--"deliberately
mistaken.")
Try it.  Feed a sound into the HETRO program.
You'll get a .HET file out.  Now feed it into
your Csound program using the ADSYN command.
Guess what?  You'll get the message "bad
file read."
Yes, Barry Vercoe has changed the Csound
HETRO format without telling anyone.  Thus
Csound's ADSYN command now cannot be used,
and has not run since the December 1994
build of Csound.
(Again, many forum subscribers will claim
this is not so, and again they'll be--let us
say--"deliberately mistaken.")
[2] Let's talk about ADSYN.  This is an almost
entirely undocumented feature of
Csound.  Vercoe's docs from a 1989 release
of Csound (not present in the current 1994
release of Csound available on John Fitch's
bulletin board) claim that "more details about
ADSYN will be given later."  They never are.
ADSYN's command syntax is a mystery.  No
one knows what it is.  Why?  Because only
Vercoe knows the full command syntax for
ADSYN, and he isn't telling. 
Thus ADSYN is useless and might as well
not be a part of Csound.  (Again, various
forum subscribers will deny this, and
again they'll be--let us say--"deliberately
mistaken.")
[3] One of the most grotesque paradoxes
of Csound is that the program is theoretically
capable of generating the world's most 
impressive reverb.  Naturally, no diagrams or
sample reverb programs exist.  Of course
many diagrams and sample reverb programs
exist for MUSIC11 or other ancient programs; and
and of course all these sample reverb programs 
require special instructions not present in
the C versin of Csound. Naturally, no one has ever 
made public the code for any of the high-quality
reverbs used in Csound instruments from places
like CCRMA or IRCAM.  Therefore (naturally!)
the only reverb currently available to users of
Csound is the 1970-vintage reverb using
4 all-pass filters and 2 comb filters.  This is
one of the world's worst-sounding reverbs:
it sounds like a tile bathroom.
The result?
If you want to add high-quality reverb
to your Csound composition, you must
compile the Csound compisition dry and
then play it through a commercial digital
reverb unit, then re-record the reverberated
Csound composition.
(Naturally, various forum subscribers will deny
this, and naturally they'll be--let us say--"deliberately
mistaken."  There is a less polite term.)
This is so grotesque and so unthinkably
bizarre as to defy credibility.  Yet there it is.
You want high-quality Csound reverb?  Record
your Csound composition through a PCM-80
or an Alesis Quadraverb and re-record it.
When you realize tha this means many, *many*
layers of re-recording to get different levels of
reverberation on a Csound compotiion, you
begin to realize the utterly insane nature
of the situation.  Yet it persists.  No high-
quality digital reverb instrument has ever been 
published, no source code for a Csound
high-quality reverb is available anywhere, 
at any time, in any way, for any reason.
(Naturally, various forum subscribers will deny
this, and naturally they'll be--let us say--
"deliberately mistaken.") 
[4] Aside from a hi-fi type "tone control"
and a sharply resonant filter called reson,
Csound offers no facilities whatever for
spectral modification of input sounds. (Naturally,
various forum subscribers will deny this, 
and naturally, they'll be--let us say--"deliberately
mistaken.")  
Mark Dolson's LPC and the Lansky LPC routines
built into Csound produce unbearably distorted
output with so many artifacts as to be musically
unusable. Cutting down the input volume doesn't
help.  Naturally, Paul Lansky's own LPC-
processed sounds exhibit *none* of these
artifacts...so (naturally) Paul Lansky must 
be using a bunch of special C code he hasn't
bothered to make public.
However, not only do the Dolson and Lansky
LPC modules in CSound produce unlistenable
garbage audio output, there are no other
less sophisticated spectral modification
routines in Csound (aside from the reson
and tone modules).
There is, for example, no way to apply 
a 50-peak formant filter to an input sound,
or to a Csound instrument on output.  There is,
for example, no way within Csound to apply the
equivalent of a graphic or parametric
equalizer to the sound.  There is assuredly
 no way to apply anything like 256 bands
of boost and cut to various frequencies,
with the boost and cut specified to the fraction
of a dB.
Naturally, this would be trivial given Csound's
processing capacbilities.  So, naturally,
it's impossible.
(Again, various forum subscribers will deny this,
and again they'll be--let us say--"deliberately
mistaken.")
[5] The IRCAM fof module is almost completely
undocumented. I've never been able to get it to
work.  
[6] The -f option to output floating point format
soundfiles doesn't work.  Output is a blaring roar.
Pure high-quality noise.
[7] On the GCC builde of Csound for the IBM PC,
instrument .orc files crash when the number of
variables exceeds 65535.  It's fairly easy to
exceed that number with a single large additive
synthesis instrument--day, 128 partials with
128-point amplitude and frequency envelopes.
So let's see: 
Fof doesn't work, HETRO and ADSYN don't work,
there's no way to build reverb in Csound, the -f
flag doesn't work, and there are no spectral 
modifiers other than RESON and TONE--and the
Dolson and Lansky LPC produce unlistenable
distorted garbage output when used inside
Csound.  You can't compile large additive
synthesis .orc files.  And the Dolson PVOC routines
produce the message MATH ERROR and a register
dump after time-stretching long files, but it
doesn't appear to affect the soundfiles.
That's a good 40% of Csound that doesn't work.
While this sounds awful, it's actually a tremendous
achievement.  A full 60% of Csound actually WORKS.
By contrast, the winner and all-time champion of
academic garbageware,  F. R. Moore's cmusic, is
100% non-functional.
Carrying on the UCSD music department's tradition
of producing unusable junk software, csmusic is *classic*
garbageware.  In the words of one of the members of
this tuning forum: "Even I know better than to download
that crap.  With more than 3000 files in hundreds of
directories, it would probably take a month of recompiles
just to get cmusic to work on the machine it was
written for--much less port it." 
As world-class garbageware, cmusic exhibits
all 4 of that species' salient characteristics:
[1] It's totally undocmented, and totally 
unsupported.  A vaguely-worded ASCII 
file always arrives with the garbageware
executables--"You can do X, Y and Z with
this wonderful pieceof software developed at
IRCAM!"  And naturally, there's not a ghost
of a clue *how* to use the software.  Naturally,
the command syntax always involves something baroque
and outlandish--CRT-ALT-SHIFT-LEFT PARENTHESIS-
+-BACKSLASH-SUB-COLON-COMMAND-F7, or 
some such.  Naturally, you'll *never* find this out
from the "docs" which arrive with the
garbageware, so naturally the software
is useless.  Inputting a "?" or "HELP COMMAND"
message always produces the message "INCORRECT
SYNTAX."
[2] Garbageware always needs 5 special hidden install files
to run on *your* computer.  Meanwhile, it comes with 5693
different install files for OTHER computers--a PRISM compiler 
for the Connection Machine, an assembly loader for the 
Commodore PET, and an INSTALL routine that runs on the 
mercury delay line of a 1948 ENIAC--but if you want
to run the Garbageware on *YOUR* computer (a Mac or a
PC), hey!  Guess what?
Yep. 
You're out of luck.  
Naturally!
Yes, indeedy, the special install files *aren't* included 
with YOUR version of the garbageware.  And where can
you find them?
You can't!
The programmer wrote the garbageware to run only on
(say) his Kaypro Robby, and never anticipated that anyone
would run the software on an exotic outre machine...
like, say, a Macintosh or an IBM PC.
[3] Once you get the garbageware up and running,
you'll discover some delightful bugs.  The 
garbageware goes south on Tuesday during full 
moons but only when it's raining.  Naturally,
the developer at IRCAM  or wherever
will describe this as a "special feature."
One of the most interesting of the "special
features" of the latest GCC compile of
Csound is that it never stops compiling on
long scores.  Yes, the compile continues from
forever to forever--infinite compilation!  What
an advance!  Why not devote an issue of Confuser
Music Urinal to this marvellous feature???
Do you have 400 megs free on your hard disk?  Want
to use it up?  Compile a 7-minute Csound score under 
the GCC Csound--you'll use up all 400 megs in 1 file!
Meanwhile, if you want to end the comiple session,
you do so by hitting CTRL-BREAK.  Clever command
syntax, eh?
[4] Last and best of all,  you'll finally come
across docs for the garbageware--docs to version 
2.19 from Carnegie-Mellon.  However,
all ftp sites curently carry v. 5.62 from
CCRMA.  And guess what?
Yep!  The command syntax has changed toally!
The command CSOUND -D -H %1 %2 now does
something interesting and different--perhaps, say,
wiping your hard disk and reformatting it.  (Gosh.
What a useful feature...)
Hurrah for academic garbageware!  Without
it, where would we be?
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Wed, 20 Dec 1995 06:05 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id VAA07412; Tue, 19 Dec 1995 21:05:36 -0800
Date: Tue, 19 Dec 1995 21:05:36 -0800
Message-Id: <951220000424_59067722@mail06.mail.aol.com>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu