source file: m1564.txt
Date: Sun, 25 Oct 1998 19:20:01 EST

Subject: psychological effects of musical frequency ratios - chord root transitions

From: Ascend11@aol.com

Daniel Wolf writes: "Isn't it interesting that each prime can divide the tonal
space in a unique way".  A factor in psychological effect of music in addition
to that of frequency ratios in individual chords is the interval over which 
a chord root transition is made - say by a fifth, by a 9/8 major second, by a
6/5 
minor third, etc.  Also, do small deviations - say by five cents - from just 
of the interval between the roots of successive chords affect the
psychological 
effect of the part of the musical phrase formed by these two successive
chords? 

Historically the idea of the 3/2 consonant fifth appeared long before there is
evidence that two or more harmonizing parts were frequently employed in music.
Of course the second note of a melodic interval would be mentally "harmonized"
with the first note.  I believe many people can easily detect a melodic fifth 
which is off from just by five cents.

Thinking as I write, I believe that there are objective, scientifically
demonstrable 
relationships between pitch relationships in music (among all the other
factors) 
and the psychological effects of the music.  Also, it would seem that if our 
understanding of the effects of these factors were deepened, it would be 
possible to create music which is even better at creating various specific 
psychological effects than is present day music.  Thus Beethoven's music is 
emotionally moving for quite a few people.  Why?  We would say that Beethoven 
was an inspired genius who had a feel for what musical edifices would be
really 
effective psychologically.  However, I believe that if - and this is beginning
to 
seem possible today - we really understood more quantitatively how music 
achieves its psychological effects, music could be produced - by individuals
who 
had deep understanding of this and had enough of Beethoven's gifts to
effectively 
use this understanding - which would equal and even surpass the music which 
Beethoven produced.

I believe that relatively fine nuances of tuning are much more important
towards 
music's achieving the psychological effects which it has the potential to
produce 
than has generally been appreciated in the recent past.  Many are now aware of
this 
and this is very encouraging.