source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sun, 24 Sep 1995 09:55:13 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & Psychoacoustics - Post 1 of 25
---
The rules of Western harmony, to paraphrase
Voltaire, are a lie commonly agreed upon.
Ultimately, the music we choose to make 
is limited (or liberated) by our understanding 
of what our ears hear, and how. 
Over the course of more than a year various
forum subscribers  have treated us to
a Mount Everest of misinformation about
what the ear hears, how the brain interprets it,
and how sounds change during the complex and
surprising process we call listening.
These fairy tales and "just so" stories about hearing
and the ear are common currency.  They are
the misinformation about the ear/brain system
that "everyone knows."   And, like giant
alligators in the sewers and detectives
photographing an image of a murderer in a 
corpse's pupils, these  tall tales  never seem 
to go away.
This post is the first of a series which 
will examine the evidence about what
the ear actually hears and how.  These posts
will discuss some of the *facts* of the 
ear/brain system, as opposed to the 
fantasies and  canards that
"everyone knows are true."
---
First, it's important to understand that
some subscribers will react violently to this
series of posts.  
Many composers, musicians and
performers will angrily attempt to refute the
facts listed here. These violent reactions 
will arise partly out of surprise, partly from
an unwillingness to relinquish long-held 
beliefs, and partly because the facts of the 
ear/brain system are not yet widely known 
outside the realm of psychoacoustics and 
psychophysics.  In fact, the majority of
today's composers and music theorists 
exist in a blissful state of ignorance
about the ear/brain system--a state similar
to that which characterized clerics in the days
when Galileo first pointed his telescope
at the moon.  Back then, "everyone knew"
that the stars were fixed in Aristotle's
crystal spheres; "everyone knew" that the
moon and sun belonged to a celestial
sphere unchanging and perfect; "everyone
knew" that the planets rotated around the
earth, and that no satellites circled (say)
Jupiter or Saturn; "everyone knew" that
Aristotle was the beginning and the end
of all knowledge, and "everyone knew"
that there remained only the tiniest 
crumbs of knowledge yet to be gleaned 
about a universe which was perfectly
ordered, perfectly simple, and--
by and large--perfectly understood.
---
When Galileo turned his lens to the 
moon and discovered that it had
mountains, and when he observed
satellites around Jupiter, and when
he saw new stars in the sky, 
he was called, alternately, "ignorant,"
"a charlatan," "an imposter,"  "well-
meaning but ignorant of Aristotle's
teachings," "too stupid to properly
interperet what he saw through
his telescope," and so on.
Many of the best-educated men and
women of Galileo's time refused
to look through his telescope at the
sky, because they *knew* that 
his claims could not possibly be
true.
It's sadly easy to deduce that all of
the above antics will be duplicated
in the course of this or that subscriber's
reaction to this series of posts.
---
This sounds shocking.  It is.  In saying
this, I assert that most musicians and
composers today are ignorant of how
the ear hears and how the brain interprets
sound.  More: I assert that they are not
only ignorant, but actively and perversely
misinformed.  Lastly, I assert that much
of this misinformation hampers the
progress of music and interferes with
our ability even to conceive new
universes of harmony and melody.  
What we cannot perceive, we cannot
explore; and when we cannot explore,
we stagnate.  
Much of the myth and fantasy which fills
musicians' heads is promulgated by
so-called "modern" academia using
so-called "modern" music theory
textbooks (the content of which actually
hails from the 17th, 18th and 19th
centuries).
The next post will present some of
the surprising  characteristics of the ear/
brain system, and some recommendations
for references.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Mon, 25 Sep 1995 01:56 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id QAA13589; Sun, 24 Sep 1995 16:56:38 -0700
Date: Sun, 24 Sep 1995 16:56:38 -0700
Message-Id: <950924235355_71670.2576_HHB53-1@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu