source file: m1425.txt
Date: Sat, 23 May 1998 23:46:39 -0400

Subject: Website links wanted - mainly yours!

From: Nelson and Tracy Denton <ndenton434@bigwave.ca>

Help me!! I want your websites!! 

Hello Friends.

Some of you may already know me from the other lists.  I run the 

"Pipe Organ Tracker Project"
http://www.freeyellow.com/members/radentonson

The worlds largest collection of links to Pipe organs and Related Keyboard
Musical Instruments.

I'm currently thinking about expanding my websites to include Specialty
Website Lists such as the 

The Classical Music Tracker Project
The Harpsichord Tracker Project
The Reed Organ Tracker Project
The Hammond Organ Tracker Project
The Electronic Organ Tracker Project
The Piano Tracker Project
Etc. Etc.   (or some other suitable titles)

All I need now is a list of websites devoted to "Tuning" Etc.

If any of you have/or know of any websites devoted to "Tuning" or a
collection of links of any sort that may be suitable for inclusion under
any of these topics  please feel free to e-mail me privately.
ndenton434@bigwave.ca

The Pipe Organ Tracker Project is a "not too profitable***" free website
filled full of thousands of links. I haven't figured out a way to make
money from it as there is no advertising or charges for listings - nor will
there be.  

***If you want to make any donations of time, money or organ collectables I
would be happy to accept it. :-)))
( my long suffering  wife would like it too)

To keep the list from becoming overwhelmed by postings please feel free to
send your postings privately and please put the words "NEW WEBSITE"
somewhere in your subject matter as I get 200-300 messages a day and some
get deleted without much ado.

I am able to accept attachments of "Bookmark files" and "Favourite Links
Files" from most web browsers.  


Haven't visited my website Yet?
Your missing out on life :-)))))
No ads, No java, No frames, No slow loading pics, No nudie girls.
well 4 outta 5 ain't bad





 
Nelson E. Denton
R. A. Denton and Son
Pipe Organ Builders
Hamilton Ontario, Canada

The Pipe Organ Tracker Project
http://www.freeyellow.com/members/radentonson
The worlds "second" largest collection of organ related links