source file: mills2.txt
Date: Mon, 6 Nov 1995 09:18:32 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject:  RATED NC-17: ALL COMPOSERS OVER AGE
  17 MUST BE ACCOMPANIED BY THE GHOST OF JOHN CAGE
---
"Modernism is now being seriously challenged for the first
time in almost a century or more.  Which, considering the 
really awful degree of narcissism, nihilism, inanity and 
self-indulgence that late modernism has allowed itself,
is probably the best thing that could happen to it. What
has been permanently lost is the sense of the absolute
that the modernist movement once gave to its loyal 
followers.  And to that we can say: good riddance.
We are none of us now--either artists or critics or the 
public--quite as susceptible as we once were to the 
idea that at a given moment in time, history ordains 
that one and only one style, one vision, one way of 
making art or one way of thinking about it, must 
triumph and all others be consigned to oblivion." 
[Kramer, Hilton, The New York Times, 28 March 1982,
 Section 2, pg. 32]
Most awful of all modernist excesses, naturally, 
are those perpetrated by John Cage and Pierre 
Boulez.
Of course everyone already knows this.  There's no 
controversy about it.  The facts have long since been
admitted in those code phrases so beloved of the
New York critical establishment.
When TIME magazine (in its Cage obit, 1 November 1993, 
pg. 87) oozes: "There was always the whiff of the
charlatan about John Cage," we all know what they
REALLY mean.  ("Cage was a con artist without a shred
of musical talent.")  They just don't want to come right
out and *admit* it because (after all) it would prove
embarrassing to explain why so many New York
critics kow-towed to Cage for so many years.
And when Roger Reynolds oohs and ahhs in an
interview-cum-suck-up with the Great Mountebank,"Your main
contribution has been to expand the idea of what it is
reasonable to do in music," we all know what Reynolds
is *really* saying:  "John Cage gave audiences the
musical equivalent of a golden shower for 40 years."
Of course, Reynolds doesn't want to come right out
and actually *say* that.  "Epater le bourgeoisie" doesn't
go over too well in the land of Oprah and Geraldo
unless you sugar-coat the pill.
And thus, while we all know and covertly admit that
John Cage was a stunt man whose musical fame  is
conducive to an understanding of how the Egyptians
could have worshipped insects...even so, none of us
really want to *admit that.*
This is peculiar, especially on a microtonal discussion
forum like this one.  After all, Cage's early prepared-
piano works flirted with the edges of the 12-tone equal
tempered scale.  It's hard to say that Cage's early 
prepared piano pieces are in any particular tuning--
least of all 12--and certainly the "Imaginary Landscape"
for radios skirted the idea of departing from 12 via 
electronic sounds.
Naturally, none of these early gimmicks provoked 
enough critical attention: and so stunt man Cage was
obliged to find some really TALL buses over
which to jump his musical Evel Kneival act.  4
minutes 33 seconds...a burning piano...whatever.
The end result, naturally, was that pathetic orgy of
gimmickry, fetishism and sheer silliness that
characterized Cage's so-called "musical" output
post-1948.
And so, instead of doing something to advance music,
he vanished into the tarpit of "narcissism, nihilism,
inanity and self-indulgence" so aptly described by
Kramer.
Boulez is a different story.
While Cage displayed dazzling early sparks of musical
talent in his "Three Constructions" and his prepared
piano pieces only to throw away his abilities in favor
of a career scamming the gullible (the compositional
equivalent of L. Ron Hubbard's reign as Dianetics
guru), Boulez never betrayed any such rudiments of 
compositional talent. 
Boulez's music created a tremendous impression in
the 1950s--until people actually heard it.  Thereafter,
his popularity dropped off sharply.
To be sure, Boulez's "acknowledged masterworks" 
(acknowledged by the other dry-as-dust theorists,
all of whose judgments and compostions are now
equally inconsequential and outdated) sound pretty, 
albeit in an inoffensive Muzak-y sort of way...  
Boulex had a gift for orchestration.  
But after about 5 minutes of "Le Marteau sans Maitre," 
or "Pli Selon Pli," you  realize it's just warmed-over 
Webern with a  Chet Baker arrangement.
Why listen to a pale imitation?  
Why drink from the toilet, instead of the tap?
Why listen to Boulez when the original--
and much more interesting--Chet Baker is available
on CD?  To say nothing of Webern.
All told, it's a shame that Boulez had no compositional
talent, nor any original ideas.  Because in the early 1950s 
Boulez (unlike Cage) actually thought seriously and at
length about microtonality:
"In considering his electronic means, the composer
has first to free himself from the conception of absolute
interval.  This can certainly be done. The tempered system
of twelve equal semi-tones seems to lose its necessity
at the very moment at which it passes from chromatic
organization to the Series.  There have already been
experiments with intervals of less than a semi-tone: of
uarter-, third- and even sixth-tones. (...) In fact, to
select a fundamental unit other than the semi-tone, 
means to conceive a kind of temperament peculiar to
a single composition; all intervals are to be heard as 
derviing from this fundamental tempering, thus affecting
the listener's conditions of perception. (...)  This tempering
may take place within the octave...or, it is equally possible
to construct in such a way that the interval with which 
the demarche of the scale commences in other than the
octave.  (...)  In this way it would be possible to derive from
one structure based on wide intervals, i.e., having a wide
compass and a semi-tone as the unit, a corresponding
structure based upon micro-intervals, in which the compass 
would be greatly reduced and where the unit would be either
a very small interval or irregular intervals defined by a
series. [Boulez, P., "At the End of Fruitful Lands..." Die Reihe, 
Vol. 1, No. 2, 1955: English translation 1957]
Alas, such ideas would have resulted in an actual *expansion*
of available musical resources...  And that could not be
permitted.  Like rock music, the modernist avant garde was
always a fanatically reactionary cult cloaked in the image
of a revolutionary vanguard.  Any *real* emancipation of
the dissonance leading to a break with the sacred 12 tones
would have thrown into disarray the whole Tammany Hall-style
patronage system of orchestras, conductors, concert halls,
the Beaux Arts, circle-jerk New York music critics, and the
rest of the corrupt musical machine.  Without the Tammany Hall
 of 12 equal tones per octave,  those who benefited from the 
patronage system of the Sacred 12 Tones (like Boulez, who 
now makes megabucks recycling tired 12-equal dribs and 
drabs as a conductor) would find themselves
out of a job.
Boulez on a street corner?
Begging for dimes?  Holding up a sign WILL CONDUCT IN 12 
FOR FOOD???
Ye gods.
Such could not be permitted. Thus, after flirting with
tdea of actually breaking free of his pathological
dodecaphilia, Boulez threw in the towel and made the
obligatory obeisance to the Sacred 12 Tones.
The result was predictable:
"Just as Marxist-Leninist thought led to forms of
government meant to remedy the excesses supposedly
caused by the exhaustion of capitalism, so Schoenbergian-
Boulezian practice was touted as the alternative to
an exhausted system called `tonality.'  These attempts
to revolutionize, respectively, our economic and musical
worlds had several other things in common besides
the Germanic origin.  The application or enactment of
both ideologies required that their alternatives--and
those who would support them--be publicly denounced 
and discredited, and a form of double-speak was
employed in support of these `revolutionary' ideas.
The apologists writing in Pravda held sway in support
of a failing system in the same way that Herbert
Eimert, Milton Babbitt, and Charles Wuorinen dominated
the pages of Die Reihe and Perspectives of New Music
for many years.  What is so interesting is the 
suddenness with which these applications of 
science--some have said pseudo-science--to economics
and music have been rejected and are now seen as
merely interesting experiments that failed
because they denied basic human realities:
economic and cultural diveristy in the political
realm and the necessity for perceptual forms of
organization and the power of intuitive processes 
in the world of music." [Appleton, Jon, "Machine Songs
III: Music In the Service of Science--Science in the
Service of Music," Computer Music Journal, vol. 16,
No. 3, Fall 1992, pp. 17-21]
Which leaves us back where we started.  Now that
everyone has tacitly admitted that Cage and Boulez
were mere pimples on the rear end of 20th
century music, it's time to look around for a new
graven idol.  The next Great Composer (now that
we've realized that the most famous so-called "Great 
Composers" of the 1950s didn't produce anything of
lasting interest)...akin to the Next Great Rock Star.
In both cases the focus is the same: keep the rubes
gawking, wow 'em with glitter and glitz, dazzle 'em
with music videos & half-naked girls (or, in the
case of prestigious New Music Journals, ritzy-
looking hypercomplex diagrams and equations)
and hit 'em with jargon....anything to keep the rubes
from realizing that it's all just a dog and pony
show. (Meanwhile, the REAL great composers like
Nancarrow, Risset, Chowning, et alii, go all but unnoticed
and all but remarked.)
And so the focus in new music has again turned 
toward the cheery cherub with the cheekiest charts, 
the wildest word-count, the most scrumptious-
looking (read: indecipherable) scores:
Namely, Ferneyhough.
This is an interesting aberration, and it spotlights
one of the deepest ruts into which post-
modernist music has fallen.  Namely, the
obsession with *intellectualizing* music.
Why do Western composers and critics and
music theorists so fanatically chart and
diagram and plot out and schematize modern
compositions?
Primarily (one suspects) in order to justify
the long-held euroschlock "doctrine that
Western European art music is superior
to all other music of the world," which
"remains a given, a truism. Otherwise
intelligent and sophisticated scholars
continue to the use the word `primitive'
when referring to the music of Africa,
American Indians, aboriginal Australians,
and Melanesians, among others."  [Becker,
Judith, "Is Western Art Music Superior?"
Musical Quarterly, Vol. 72, No. 2, 1986, pg.
341]
Yo!
Western composers and performers might
not be able to produce rhythms as complex
as those of the Balinese gamelan, or tunings
as subtle as those used in the sub-Saharan
ugubhu, or to move audiences as deeply
as do the "weeping" pitches of Kaluli 
gisalo songs, but...hey!  
At least *we* euro-dudes can ALWAYS
come up with bigger, better, more
impressive *charts* of our compositions
than any other musical culture on earth!
(A typically priapic male obsession.  "Mine
is bigger than yours..."  My compositional
diagram, that is.  No wonder there are
so few famous women composers.  Can anyone
imagine a *woman* wasting 6 months of her
life straight-edging a bunch of chicken-scratches
that explain something everyone can already
*hear*???)
Thus the bizarre and otherwise incomprehensible
elevation of such  duffers as  Ferneyhough...whose 
scores are, indeed, quite  impressive--as grafitti.
Indeed, nary a subway train in New York or a wall
in South Central L.A. is as crammed with in-group
jargon and chock-a-block with meaningless verbiage as
one of Ferneyhough's articles. (In fact one very
prominent member of this tuning forum laughed
out loud while perusing one of Ferneyhough's
ludicrous "Perversions of New Music" articles,
chuckling: "Looks like the guy follows the same
aesthetic when writing as when composing... Or
should one say, the same lack thereof?"  NO, folks,
it wasn't this little lad, but someone much better
known.) 
This teaches an important lesson to microtonalists:
if ya wanna get famous, ya gotta make diagrams.
1/1 has made a start at this--ratio-space
charts look impressive, and to infants
or the mentally retarded or the average new music
doyen they'll doubtless exert an irresistable
attraction.
Baby go goo-goo at pwetty pitchah! 
Of course, this is the Motown approach to 
popularizing microtonality.  According to this
guerilla strategy (practiced extensively in New 
York), the objective is a "crossover" composition
that "breaks through" into the white male
New York  critical establishment.
As with the de-funked un-gotten-down R&B of  
Motown records, all potentially controversial and
threatening aspects of the music must be
shaved off and polished away, leaving a
bland whitebread generic product sufficiently
"mainstream" to attract a mass audience.
And while the New York composers/performers
represent the Motown approach to microtonality,
those of us on the West Coast represent the
Stax approach.
"F*** 'em!" is the West Coast philosophy with
regard to the New York critical establishment:
if they can't stand the microtonal heat, let
'em flee the concert hall. This alternative
approach to popularizing microtonality 
relies on the rasty nasty snazzy sound of
strange intervals and unfamiliar musical
forms to attract the adventurous concert-goer
and CD buyer.  While the New York crowd blows 
dust off musty scores like Dick Stein's 1906 1/4-tone
cello piece for a concert at Juilliard, the
West Coast crowd blasts the audience with
full-bore hard-core microtones from the 
git-go in exotic tunings like 13-TET and
13-limit JI and harmonic series 1-60.
Each approach has its merits.  Stax or Motown,
both seem to attract their share of "mainstream"
"crossover" audience from standard bland 12.
Regardless of the approach, it remains an
unfortunate fact that "I have learned that if
I produce a complex structural diagram of a piece
of music from anywhere, the students will listen
to the piece more carefully and will regard it with 
greater respect.  A structural diagram gives the
music a legitimacy it does not have without 
the analysis." [Becker, Judith, "Is Western Art
Music Superior?" Musical Quarterly, Vol. 72, No
2, 1986, pg. 346.]
So here's a helpful suggestion: when giving lectures or
concerts, microtonalists should project an overhead
transparency of the New York subway system and
throw in some gibberish about "pitch class
matrices" and "all-interval sets" and "maximally
symmetric stochastic distributions."  This will
wow the eurogeeks and ensure that the microtonal
music is listened to with *great* attention.  
After all, it requires hardly *any* skill or
intelligence to perpetrate this kind of musico-
theoretic scam, and the rewards are VAST...as 
Cage and Boulez have so amply demonstrated.
--mclaren
 

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Mon, 6 Nov 1995 19:21 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id JAA25588; Mon, 6 Nov 1995 09:21:02 -0800
Date: Mon, 6 Nov 1995 09:21:02 -0800
Message-Id:  <9511060919.aa20661@cyber.cyber.net>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu