source file: mills2.txt


Subject: ## VRML generation to Symbolic Composer ## (fwd)

From: Peter Stone <psto@xs4all.nl>

Symbolic Composer was recently enhanced by VRML 1.0 interface, which 
allows to generate 3 dimensional worlds directly with SCOM algorithms.
Symbolic Composer continues as an exclusive music composition program,
while Einstein's Daydream will grow more into 3D graphic composition,
maintaining full-compatibility with SCOM music language.

PRESS RELEASE, For Immediate Release 

Announcing Einstein's Daydream 1.0
Algorithmic Toolbox for Creating VRML Moving Worlds and MIDI Music to the Web 

AMSTERDAM, June 24, 1996 Algorithmic Research today announced Einstein's
Daydream, an algorithmic toolbox for creating VRML 1.0 and VRML 2.0 compatible
worlds and MIDI music to the Web.

"The current trend to replicate shopping malls and banks into virtual 
reality does not favour the algorithmic nature of cyberspace. Instead, our
challenge will be to explore the unknown and build the wild and free 
cyberspace generating it by algorithms. Einstein's Daydream will bring 
artistic and musical cyberspace designs a reality, available for the 
millions who will access the world-wide information matrix," said Peter 
Stone, president of Algorithmic Research. 

Einstein's Daydream produces VRML 1.0 and VRML 2.0 Moving Worlds compatible
files that can be placed in servers, or processed further in VRML builder
programs. Algorithms can control VRML 1.0/2.0 language parameter fields, 
and allow to create objects, animations, camera paths, behaviours, actions 
and reactions. 

Algorithms cover lsystems, fourier synthesis, noise, fractals, chaos,
oscillators, neurons, number theory, fibonacci sequences, prime numbers,
autocatalysis and processors, totaling over 400 functions applicable on 
any VRML constructs, or MIDI. 

MIDI file generation uses object-oriented SCOM language that covers musical
micro and macrostructures definable by algorithms. MIDI playback is based 
on 256 channel operation, and is internal. A Netscape plug-in is supplied 
to achieve the same resolution in servers. VRML file generation requires 
an external VRML-compatible browser for viewing. 

Einstein's Daydream is implemented in Lisp and runs on the Macintosh. Windows
version is under preparation and will be announced later this year. 

Einstein's Daydream is targeted for advanced users for creating algorithmic
worlds and music, or experimenting and studying virtual architecture not
bound to physical constraints. 

"The philosphy of Einstein's Daydream is simple: to supply the user a 
toolbox of interoperative modular functions, that can be applied on 
generating whatever there is possible in VRML and MIDI specifications. 
As an ascii-written, user-extendable Lisp-based language Einstein's Daydream
does not represent limits of expression, but naturally requires a certain
decipline to adapt into algorithmic construction." 

Features

Einstein's Daydream includes optimized development environment for editing 
and maintaining code and accessing hypertext documents needed in program
development. The interface enables pasting of language macros for quick 
coding and 2D viewing of parameter data. If you are not a programmer, this
environment will make you a programmer. 

Einstein's Daydream uses open and modular software architecture. New functions
can be added snapping in plug-in modules. New modules can be programmed
online with build-in Lisp interpreter. The modules can be compiled into
fast-executing machine language with Macintosh Common Lisp, available through
Digitool. Document system can be expanded by dragging folders containing new
documents into the Documents folder. 

Algorithmic Research is collecting a list of subscribers who would like to
obtain Einstein's Daydream for Windows at a reduced price for $100 to support
the porting costs. After porting the price will jump to the list price $495. 
In case your company is interested in sponsoring the development, or if you
would like to subscribe the Windows version contact Peter Stone. Upgrade to
Einstein's Daydream will be available to SCOM Pro users for $199. Developer's
discount is available for persons who would like to start writing 3D 
extension modules, or new scientific algorithms to Einstein's Daydream. 

Specifications

 Platform:
                    Macintosh
 Operating System:
                    Mac OS
 Minimum Memory:
                    8 MB RAM, 16 MB-32 MB suggested
 VRML Generation:
                    VRML 1.0 (VRML 2.0 soon) 
 Music Generation:
                    MIDI
 Nmbr. of Algorithms:
                    400+100

Further Information

Here are a couple of examples that show you the effect of algorithmic
construction of a hypercube, nested in levels 2 and 3 (VRML 1.0 file 
format). cube32.wrl and cube33.wrl. There is also a small gallery of 
screen shots of the hypercube.

         http://www.xs4all.nl/~psto/vrml/einstein.html

 Contact:
         Peter Stone
         Algorithmic Research
         +31-20-6957 880
         psto@xs4all.nl