source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sat, 7 Oct 1995 07:42:06 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & psychoacoustics - post 14 of 25
---
"In the case of the octave, the craving for stretching has been noticed for 
both dyads and melodic intervals. The amount of stretching preferred 
depends on the mid frequency of the interval, among other things. The 
average for synthetic, vibrato-free octave tones has been found to be about 
15 cents.  Thus, subjects found a just octave too flat but an octave of 1215 
cents just." [Sundberg, J. "The Science of Musical Sounds," 1992, pg. 104]
MYTH: "The interval is just or not at all." [Harrison, "Lou Harrison's Music 
Primer," 1971, pg. 48]
FACT: "For centuries, musical folklore has held that the simplest ratios are 
the best  ratios, in musical intonation.  Thus the interval betwen two 
frequencies having a ratio of 3:2 is the "perfect" fifth; 4:3 gives a "perfect" 
fourth, etc. (...) These philosophical and a priori views of temperament, 
however, are hardly supported by empirical evidence." [Ward, W.D. and 
Martin, W.D., "Psychophysical Comparison of Just Tuning and Equal 
Temperament in Sequences of Individual Tones," JASA, Vol. 33, No. 50, 1961, 
pg. 586]
MYTH: "This 2 to 1 relationship is a constant one...the fact is that nature 
does not offer one tone and its doubling (200 to 400) as a given quality of 
relationship, and the same quality of relationship in two tones which are 
not a ratio of doubling (200 to 600, for example)" [Harry Partch, "Genesis of 
a Music,"  2nd. Ed., 1974, pg. 77.]
FACT: "If a frequency of 8 kHz is chosen for f1, subjects produce for the 
sensation of `half pitch' not at a frequency of 4 kHz, but a frequency of about 
1300 Hz." [E. Zwicker and H. Fastl, "Psychoacoustics: Facts and Models," 
1993, pg. 103.] 
MYTH: "If, through some terrestrial disaster, our [equal-tempered] musical 
system were completely lost, it would sooner or later be inevitably 
redicsovered, just as it exists today, after having passed through 
transformations identical or similar those those it has undergone." [Ducup 
de Saint-Paul, quoted in Matthys Vermeulen, "Hic et Nunc, Jacobe," Djawa, 
Vol. 12, 1932, pp. 146-149]
FACT: "It is quite remarkable that musicians seem to prefer too wide or 
"stretched" intervals." [Johan Sundberg, "The Science of Musical Sounds," 
1992, pg. 103.]
MYTH: "Notice that these frequency clumps are arranged in a harmonic series 
based on a fundamental frequency half that of tone M, and also that any lack 
of accuracy in setting an exact 3/2 frequency ratio will be called to our 
attention... " [Benade, A. H., Fundamentals of Musical Acoustics, 1975, pg. 
272]
FACT: "The experimental results very convincingly show that, on the 
average, singers and string players perform the upper notes of the major 
third and the major sixth with sharp intonation (Ward 1970)...The same 
experiments revealed that also fifths and fourths and even the almighty 
octave were played or sung sharp, on the average! (A reciprocal effect 
exists. Pure octaves are consistently judged by musicians to sound flat!) 
Rather than revealing a preference for a given scale (the Pythagorean), these 
experiments point ot the existence of a previously unexpected *universal 
tendency to play or sing sharp all musical intervals.* (italics in original 
text)" [Juan Roederer, "Introduction to The Physics and Psychophysics of 
Music," 1973, pg. 155.]
MYTH: "Consequently, these statements can be conclusively made; the ear 
consciously or unconsciously classifies intervals according to their 
comparative consonance or comparative dissonance; this faculty in turn 
stems directly form the comparative smallnesss or comparative largeness 
of the numbers of the vibrational ratio..." [Harry Partch, "Genesis of a Music,"  
2nd. Ed., 1974, pg. 87.]
FACT: "Therefore it must be concluded that even just or pythagorean 
intonation cannot be considered as ideal.  Rather, optimum intonation of a 
diatonic scale probably depends on the structure of the actual sound in the 
same manner as has been previously discussed with respect to tempered 
scales." [E. Terhard and S. Zick, "Evaluation of the Tempered Tone Scale In 
Normal, Stretched, and Contracted Intonation," Acustica, Vol. 32, 1975, pg. 
273.]
MYTH:"The reason that the ratio does not change is simply and wholly because  physiogically the ear does not change excpet over a period of thousands and  millions of years." [Partch, Genesis of a Music, 2nd ed.,
 1974, pg. 97]
FACT: "The degree of consonance depends on the quality or  spectrum of the 
component tones, i.e., the relative intensity of dissonant vs. consonant upper 
harmonics." [Juan Roederer, "The Physics and Psychoacoustics of Music," pg. 
143.]
MYTH: "Long experience in tuning reeds on the Chromelodeon convinces me 
that it is preferable to ignore partials as a source of musical materials.  
The ear is not impressed by partials as such.  The faculty--the prime 
faculty--of the ear is the perception of small-number intervals, 2/1, 3/2, 
4/3, etc., etc., and the ear cares not a whit whether these intervals are in or 
out of the overtone series." [Harry Partch, "Genesis of a Music,"  2nd. Ed., 
1974, pg. 87.]
FACT: "In 1987 IPO issued a wonderful disc by Houtsma, Rossing and 
Wagenaars...illustrating the effects of a moderate stretching...of scale 
frequencies and/or partial spacings. Part of a Bach chorale is played with 
synthesized tones. When neither scale nor partial frequencies are stretched, 
we hear the intended harmonic effect.  When the scale is unstretched but the 
partial frequencies are stretched, the music sounds awful. Clearly, intervals 
in the ratio of small whole numbers are in themselves insufficient to give 
Western harmonic effects." [John R. Pierce, "The Science of Musical Sound," 
2nd Ed., pp. 91-92.]
MYTH: "In the previous section of this chapter, I made a definition: we would 
henceforth reserve the word  *tone* to refer to sounds having harmonic 
partials. For emphasis, I will often refer to such sounds as musical    
tones...to underline the fact that harmonically related complexes of partials 
have a very    special    perceptual    status    that happens also to make 
them useful in music." [Benade, A.H., Fundamentals of Musical Acoustics, 
1975, pg. 264]
FACT: "Clearly the timbre of an instrument strongly affects what tuning and 
scale sound best on that instrument." [Wendy Carlos, "Tuning: At the 
Crossroads," Computer Music Journal, 1987.]
"Most instruments in our music culture produce harmonic spectra,  as 
mentioned.  However, in the contemporary computer-aided electroacoustic 
music studios, is not a necessary constraint any longer.  One would then ask 
if this does not open up quite new possibilities also with respect to 
harmony.  If one decides to use one particular kind of inharmonic sepctra for 
all tones, it should be possible to tailor a new scale and a new harmony to 
this inharmonicity." - Johan Sundberg, "The Science of Musical Sounds," pg. 
100.
"By using a digital computer, musical tones with an arbitrary distribution of 
partials can be generated.  Experience shows that, in accord with Plomp's 
and Levelt's experiments with pairs of sinusoidal tones, when no two 
successive partials are too close together such tones are consonant rather 
than dissonant, even though the partials are not harmonics of the 
fundamental.  For such tones, the conditions for consonance of two tones 
will not in general be the traditional ratios of the frequencies of the 
fundamentals...  [The 8-TET scale] is, of course, only one example of many 
possible scales made up of tones whose upper partials are not harmonics of 
the fundamental and having unconventional intervals, which nonetheless can 
exhibit consonance and dissonance comparable to that obtained with 
conventional musical intstruments (which have harmonic partials) and the 
diatonic scale.  It appears that, by providing music with tones that have 
accurately specific but nonharmonic partial structures, the digital comptuer 
can release music from the constraint of 12 tones without throwing 
consonance overboard."  [John R. Pierce, "Attaining Consonance in Arbitrary 
Scales," Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1966, p. 249.]
"The physical correlate of an interval is not a ratio, anymore than the 
physical correlate of a pitch is a frequency.  Intervals and pitches both have 
thresholds, ranges of variability," [Moran, H. and C. C. Pratt, "Variability of 
Judgments on Musical Intervals," Journal of Experimental Psychology, Vol. 9, 
1926] 
Evidence for this conclusion is so voluminous and so detailed that it 
cannot be contained in a single series of 22 posts. However, the next post 
scratches the surface of this body of evidence, and hints at the enormous
 extent of the experimental data showing a universal human preference for 
stretched octaves, fifths, thirds, etc.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Sun, 8 Oct 1995 03:26 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id SAA22621; Sat, 7 Oct 1995 18:25:50 -0700
Date: Sat, 7 Oct 1995 18:25:50 -0700
Message-Id: <951008012346_71670.2576_HHB23-1@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu