source file: mills2.txt
Date: Mon, 14 Apr 1997 03:57:25 -0700

Subject: Re: April Fools, Wagner, UNABOM, Xfiles, Quantum Mechanics...

From: Atlas Eclipticalis <ribarbe@garlic.com>

I spent the whole day thinking about the music theory arguments 
surrounding the composition technique of Richard Wagner, specifically 
wheather or not the Prelude to Tristan und Isolde is in a tonal key.  This 
is what we are talking about now in my theory class at De Anza.  (weak 
disclaimer: Im a student).  I don't 
mean to single Reinhard's article out, but it connected with my thoughts 
about music (among other things) so Id thought Id share.  I welcome all 
responses, and they will all be included in future considerations of this 
topic by me, and would be much appreciated.  I dont know about the big 
Wagner music list, so cross-posting would definitely be appreciated.

This is in response to Johnny Reinhardt's in Tuning Digest 1044. 

Heavens Gate, imminent doom, the first of april?
Aka, is quantization geometry reincarnate?

Good April Fools must be ernetsly sought out, you say.  Well I found a 
bizzare one today on television, the great source you mentioned.  I dont 
think its a joke though, and Im sitting here contemplating the universe 
because I just flipped out when I realized I solved a crime:
                                           ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^                   
I was watching the ch2 news, right after seeing a time-warped episode of 
the Xfiles.  The story was of a man who escaped from prison this morning 
and kidnapped a man named Brian Kelly.  The journalist showed video of 
Brian Kelly being interviewed publicly.  Then, the news described the 
escaped convict as a master of disguises and has been known to dress as a 
womam, and was in the AIDS unit of the prison in Vacaville, CA.  The 
convict, David Anderson, was then shown dressed as a woman, along with 
about four other pictures of him in other disguises from the police 
archive.  The news explained Kelly's story as Kelly was kidnapped near 
the prison and they went to a motel.  However, when I saw the faces flash 
by in the montage of the guises of David Anderson, I recognized the face 
of Brian Kelly, and linked the two people forever like anti-particles.  
It was the mug shot of a false face that tipped it off.  The face of 
Brian Kelly belongs to the elaborate and complicated imagination of a 
convicted murderer, David Anderson.  The avatar of Brian Kelly was empty 
and without a soul. He complained that he was afraid to call the police 
at first.  He faulted fear.  This ocurrs at many conceptual levels.  
Almost boggles the mind.  I think this reporting television journalist 
has created the perfect and sweetest "scoops" of the century, although it 
was incomplete without the 'anti-matter' like link between Brian Kelly 
and David Anderson. 

That is basically it, but since Im also in Logic class this quarter, I 
would like now talk about that some more.

The conclusion to my argument is that this man needs to be arrested 
because To complete the last link of my story, they would need to match 
the true identity of Brian Kelly with the escaped prisoner's.  The media 
story of a kidnapping was part of the "plan" in the convicts mind.  It is 
now time for the scene in Scooby-Doo to take off the mask.

It doesn't exactly end there.  No, this is where the universe starts 
collapsing, and we start to get into time travel and stuff. 

I was just watching X files right before the news tonite.  The episode 
was about a man who becomes 'enlightened' frightfully by inventing and 
manufacturing a chemical substance which apparently freezes the body to 
0K (impossible in this universe) and allows unrestricted travel through 
time, because matter is transformed by the infinities to "Tachyon" energy 
particles, which travel both backward and forward in time because of 
their absolute smallness and unity of existence (devoide of creation, the 
energy perspective of newton's conservation of mass and energy).  In this 
Universe, only unities and singularities exhibt strange and odd 
perplexing time-domain characteristics.  For this reason, it makes an 
great TV show.  Any way, this guy shoots up this freezing agent in the 
future and slips back about 5 hours and tries to stop himself from 
created what he did.  Notice creation is involved.  We said that being 
devoid of creation (not in the religious sense, but the newtonioan) was a 
characteristic of only the absolutely small (energy, 0Kelvin, the absence 
of energy, which denies conservation).   As you can see indeed the loops 
created by these arguments cycle deeper and deeper in to the infinities 
they describe, like a snake nourishing itself eternally on its yummy 
tail.  A very good marketing ploy for Silicon Valley drones is used by 
the television media to feature logically inquisitive programming (such 
as self-reference, infinite loops, quantum mechanics, astrophysics), plus 
familiar internet distributed "urban folklore" issues of debate on 
alt.legends.urban-folklore (like cryobiology), occult numerology (I quote 
from the show, 'I wrote when I was 23..').  On the show, the man who 
invented time travel by evil and murderous means (it happened in a 
different universe) comes back to prevent himself from doing it.  They 
first meet outside.  The man slipped back in time and he appeared older, 
suffering from the effects of super-light-speed travel.  At any point in 
the show, one might refute the logic as completely invalid because of the 
infinite loops, but you have to remember its television, and it is a 
dramatic representation of a scientific reality which does actually 
ocurr.  The broadest term I can think of strait off is 'string theory'.  
This gentelman represents an infinitely massive AND nearly absolutely 
small event that ocurrs regularly.  Basiclly its a long string of energy 
which climbs through different universes, or different dimentions.  
Imagine 26 dimentions and 11 universes.  The string crawls in and out 
near the worm hole's in time, black holes, as described by Steven Hawking 
in _A Brief History of Time_ (1998).  This new york times best seller is 
written by a man most people claim is "enlightened" in possibly the same 
way the mad scientist in the X files was, or more directly, in the same 
way that the Sqaure of Abott's _Flatland_ (1898) was enlightened by the 
Sphere from the land of solids (three physical dimentions).  The 
appearance of the string in our universe is evidenced by anti-matter 
pairs which occur very near singularities like black holes.  Acording to 
Hawking, black holes give off measurable photon like gamma-ray 
radiation.  This is an energy they emit because near a black hole, pairs 
of short-lived anti-particles pop into existence from apparently 
nothing.  They live an extremely, and near absolutely short life, but it 
is sizable enough to rule out infinitude error.  According to the rule of 
gravity, the particles coming into existence out of seeming nothingness 
must be affected by the nearby singularity, the black hole.  Its pretty 
massive, its mass distributed across all the dimensions in an infinitely 
small space.  One of these particles may indeed fall prey to the black 
hole, but the other escapes into the night sky as gamma-ray radiation.  
The wave pattern of the radiation is retained from the original 
pan-dimentional "string" it formerly belonged to.  Pan-dimentiality and 
enlightened knowledge are deeply connected with Hawkings' reports, which 
are similar in inquisitive nature as Flatland is.  They both regard 
pan-dimentiality as an ultimate question, and science for entertainment 
(literary devices, drama, personification).  These lead to logically 
invalid increases in order and level of structure.  Or do they, well I 
dont really know that.  A not-so-final point is that all the arguments 
here revert to infinitudes, except for the last it appears.  That is the 
logical background of the so-called grand unification theory member called 
'string theory'.  Its strength is in the admission of finite 
measurement at the core of logical statement, which is the anti-matter 
pair, one emitted and measured, the other sucked to visit other 
dimentions in a black hole.
As a point of coincidence, I had been flipping through Hawkings' book less 
than two hours previous to viewing the television show and news report, 
explaining the String Theory and the chapter called 'why black hole's 
ain't so black'.

It gets wierder.  Since Im a music major:
Richard Wagner created a wonderfully playful artform in the romantic era 
of musical theory.  His music and ideas about drama and life itself 
influenced and created a perspective for ironically-named great men: 
Nietzche "God is Dead", Hitler (_Mein Kampf_), Straus (_Also Sprach 
Zarathustra_, Death and Transfuguration_).  Dozens of present day popular 
images also fit under Wagnerian Art, such as Kubric's _2001_ film about 
Possibility of Pan Dimentional enlightenment.  Wagner was a student of 
the classics, and was no doubt knowledgable by Zoroastrianistic and Hindu 
traditions regarding pan-dimentional enlightenment, avatarism, and 
reincarnation as their 'unification theory'.   The genius of Wagner by 
this argument is that since its so entertaining to study this stuff and 
create with it, you can acheive anything want, and become rich and 
famous.  Modern examples like musical ensemble KMFDM(A drug against 
war), Einsteurzende Neubauten (_Hamlet Machine_), Kubric (film direction), 
John Williams (Jaws, Star Wars music), mimic the initial success that Wagner 
enjoyed as a National Socialist afficionado. 

The stickieness of these arguments are they they tend to duplicate 
themselves easily, and thats why there are so important to modern day 
society.  People will soon be confused about reality.  A friend of a 
friend is filming a movie, for which I will produce the sound track, 
about a Jesuit involved in a church cover-up of news of a "companion" 
space craft trailing comet Hale-Bopp.  Its made its pass a few days ago 
(Reality has entered the scene again).  

In looping arguments, the point of being sucked in intellectually is 
called the "pattern" by philosophers.  In eventual, momentary existence, 
we call it coincidence, paralellism, and according to Douglas Hofstadter 
(_Godel, Escher, Bach: the Eternal Golden Braid_), isomorphism.

The essential looping argument is born when the argument gains the 
ability to reason about itself, says Hofstadter.  In symbolic logic, this 
is described by the meta-mathematics of Godel.  In sound form, this is 
described by Bach's _Art of the Fugue_.  In visual form, this is 
represented in the work of MC Escher.  When an art form includes all 
senses of the goings about of daily life, that is a "Wagnerian" ideal.  
It is complete because it has the ability to talk about itself.  
Therefore you can never have completeness and consistency together in 
natural systems.  What you get is a choice between the two.  Either you 
laugh or you don't, right?  In Bach's case, I laugh, its very beautiful, 
and worthwile art. In the case of the UNABOMer, I remain paranoid and 
skeptical, not laughing. 

    "Blood has been shed" says a kidnapper in the movie "Fargo".

Robert Anton Wilson wrote a play called "Reality is only what you Make of 
It".  My email program just crashed but thank goodness its set for direct 
to disk composition, so I didn't just loose 3 hours of mindless ranting.
Anywho- Some folks from San Diego went nuts and bought into the story, 
which originated as a folklore tale on the internet.  Heavan's Gate was 
an internet publishing company.  It might have been a pan dimentional 
marketing ploy to get more people over to the site, which still serves an 
enourmous amount of people everyday around the world; this is just like 
any other conspiracy and enlightened super-logical devoted man might 
create, and be trapped in forever (in death).  

This apparent Hellish eternal damnation to the world of cries and moans 
(a Masonic Parsifal reference) was dramatically played out by detectives 
in the X Files show I saw tonite.  The mad scientist who goes back to 
meet himself five hours in the past, eventually anhiliates himself by 
joining with himself (anti-matter particles "anhiliate" when the meet 
each other and go back into the nether-reaches of other dimentions).  So 
his character explains to himself before he anhiliates with himself that 
he has "seen" everything.  "Imagine what it would be like to know 
everything that has ever happened and ever will happen" he says.
His demise is dramatically powerful, as the two men draw nearer to each 
other, moaning and wailing louder and louder and closer and closer until 
they both spontaneously combust (anhiliation logically) and not a trace 
of their physical beings is left behind in this Universe.  

I was discussing the possibility of time travel with my fiance, who is 
studying oriental phylosophy and medicine academically.  Her question was 
it could it exist, because why couldn't it?  It was completely puzzling 
to both of us, and I could only explain it away with the looped argument 
that since time travel could possibly destroy the universe as we know it 
in a paradox situation (Shades of fascism, Hitler) 

Using loops as natually occuring logical entities (be they valid or 
invalid), is an important spring-tool when developing a wholesome and 
organic view of "life, the universe, and everything." --Douglas Adams 
quoted from _The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy_, which incedentally is 
about how the planet earth is a project of two pan-dimentional beings 
incarnated as a pair of white mice to discover the meaning of life.  I 
say, when brought back to reality, the fruits of such a project would be 
combined and unified with James Lovelock's "Gaia Theory" of earth as a 
super-organism.  What is the meaning of life you ask?  This is an 
actually news item from an National Public Radio news item:

                              From NPR:
[10.]     [FORTY-TWO] - We explain that the preliminary results of a
new measurement of the so-called Hubble Constant, taken by radio
telescopic means at Cambridge University in England is 42. The Hubble
Constant determines the speed at which galaxies are receding from each
other, and thus tells us the age of the universe from the time of the
Big Bang. It so happens that Douglas Adams, in the book and radio
series "A Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy" in 1978 had a massive
computer calculate the meaning of life and the answer was: 42.
(2:15) (IN STEREO)


The news story in question was found during an internet search for 
"Douglas Adams" and was written by NPR in 1997.  The Adams' text explains 
dramatically that the giant computer is actually Earth, which gets 
destroyed minutes before completing its sole computation, in the grand 
fashion of good science fiction, it is knocked out to make way for a 
hyper-space bypass.  This hyper-space bypass resembles the theory of 
Black holes as worm holes through dimentions, and the string theory, 
where mass travels in and out of our dimentional planes.


Master of Disguises.

I would also, for the sake of my English 1b class, relate the whole 
shooting match to the UNABOMer case and Logging Industry.  Now the 
UNABOMer went nuts and killed a whole lot of people who were big players 
in anti-socialist attitudes toward nature, such as non-sustainable 
plunder of natural resources, which the UNABOMer explains in his 
so-called Manifesto.  In the traditionally apocalyptic manifesto style, 
the UNABOMer details his thought processes (delusion of reality) in order 
to validate extreme action as a means toward the goal of socialization of 
resources: ultimate sustainability, which is completely inconsistent with 
our present lifestyles (garbage cycles as replacement ecosystems).  We 
will attempt to jail this man Theodore Kazinsky, accused of being the 
UNABOM suspect.  He was a notorious Master of Disguises

Kazinsky is merely an incarnation of the Wagnerian Artform, also known 
as the Unified Theory of Aristotelian Arts, according to music theoreticians.
This strange coincidence is another piece of evidence toward the 
usefullness of organic-type logical arguments in recognizing universal 
pattern.  The ultimate goal of life the universe and everything is thus 
said to be (although still in process) the discovery of the answer to 
everything, a single piece of logic that just about sums it up for this 
universe, such as the many incarnations of Forcess*Accelleration which 
have been cropping up since Newton.  These examples include 

The UNABOMer's manifestation of this time-reaching Master of Guise ("The 
Master" in BBC's Doctor Who science fiction program) is both that of Ted 
Kazinsky and Wassily Kadinsky, a polish painter, whose work degenerated 
into what is now termed "abstract" painting.  He recalled having a 
'conversion' experience and revelation (enlightenment anyone?) after 
coming home one night after seeing the premiere of a Shoenberg opera 
(Wagnerian) or was it the other way around.  Anyways, this is where I 
need to do some research instead of typing, hehehe.  (Resist the 
Temptation to Code, programming teachers tell me)

In the BBC Doctor Who series, the Doctor is a series of pan-dimentional 
incarnations who patrol the universe for violators of space-time 
continuum policy, which is governed by his race, called "Time-Lord".  An 
errant timelord called the Master (an enlighted being dressed in black, 
who speaks in circles, and is the parallel of the Fallen Angel in 
christian theology) is the usuall suspect for Doctor Who, who's job it is 
to foil the Master's criminal plans to rule the universe by exploiting 
time travel.  The X-files episode on tonite had a Doctor-Who-like flavor.
The Fallen Angel is associated with infinite hell in conservative 
christian theologies, just as the mad scientist had ended his life by 
entering the infinite by flaming spontaneosly (a "hellish" and terrific 
way to go).  

A recent communication event between artists of this type of logic was 
billed as follows on an MIT internet document 
(http://www-mitepress.mit.edu/LEA/bkissues/lea2-6.txt)

file quoted here The conference is being organized in commemoration of the 200th 
birthday of the  Conservatoire National des Arts et Metiers. It 
will be articulated with these  suggested themes:

- a Multiform Activity:
Castel as a Pedagogue, Physicist, Zoologist, Mathematician, 
Esthete,  Tactician, Journalist, Polygraphic Designer, 
Musicologist;
- the "Invention" of the Ocular Harpsichord: Resonance and 
Interference:
Antecedents and Predecessors, Epistemological and Philosophical 
Foundation (a certain vision of the  world, a "Jesuit" Physics, 
Descartes/Newton's debate, some about Leibniz Theological 
debates, etc...);
- Castel and his Ocular Harpsichord facing his contemporaries:
    + Reception: books, papers and others evidences
    + The Prestigious Witnesses: Montesquieu, Rameau, Voltaire, 
Rousseau, Diderot, D'Alembert, Telemann, Geminiani, Goethe,
    + Reception of Castel's work abroad,
    + Modern set-back of Castel's false colour/sound analogy 
      direct repetition;
- The Posterity of the Ocular Harpsichord
A tradition in Bordeaux's Country? (Manslon, Alexandre Durand),
    + Synesthetic Art (symbolists, Charles Beaudelaire, 
      Alexandre Scriabine, Paul Klee. Man Ray, Eric de 
      Hauleville, Walt Disney, Jean Michel Jarre, 
      Kadinsky, etc.),
    + Esthetical Theories,
    + Scientific Theories of Coloured Hearing Synesthesia,
    + Technical Aspects and realisation: two centuries of 
      Technological  Experimentation,
    + New instruments to perform Colour-Music.


Now the connections described here are not to promte a "new" theory of 
mine, but is an articulation of this style and fasion of art which has 
become a universe of reality for many brilliant minds, such as Wagner and 
Hawking, and how it has wreaked havok in the case of Hitler, and the 
astounding UNABOM coincidences (especially if you liked the similar names 
Kazinsky and Kadinsky).  That is a mere tool of this type of argument; 
speaking about the argumentation procedure is also a mark of natural 
infinite-loop argumentation.


Regarding the Escaped Convict story, Im wondering if they have solved 
this case, or maybe this document would be usefull to the authorities.  
The current media-government cycle would be well served by a solution to 
an apparent physical duality created by information alone conflicts with 
the more probable case that the kidnapping victim is none other than 
master of disguise David Anderson.

If it is of immediate interest, the apropriate calls should be made, 
because I don't want to spontaneously combust.


THE END (almost)
signed by
Richard E Barber, student of De Anza College
ribarbe@garlic.com
If you need help with my information sources, that can be resolved 
through email.  Im just writing this crap off the top of my head.
I spend most of my free time thinking about music in the same way as this.


The stuff about the convict is reality by anyone's guess, so here it is:

Here are the actual news items as listed in Yahoo! today (Sunday)
file quoted here 
Friday April 11 6:02 PM EDT 

Prison escapee may be in San Francisco

SAN FRANCISCO, April 11 (UPI) _ Police say a convicted murderer is 
believed to have kidnapped a Dixon man only hours after his Thursday 
morning escape from the California Medical Facility in Vacaville. 

Officer Michael Fernandez says today (Friday) that convict David Wayne 
Anderson approached Robert Brian Kelly at a Raley's Supermarket in 
Vacaville to ask where the nearest big city was. 

Fernandez says Anderson then abducted Kelly and drove to San Francisco. 

A manager at the Royal Motel on Lombard Street says Anderson and Kelly 
checked into the motel about 1:30 p.m. Thursday, using Kelly's 
identification and credit card. 

Manager J. R. Garon says Kelly came to the desk Friday morning to report 
that he had been robbed of his wallet and pickup truck. 

Garon said Kelly, who appears to be in his mid-30s, was afraid to call 
police because he feared Anderson would hurt his family. Kelly said he 
had been bound to a chair until he was able to free himself with 
scissors. 

Anderson had been at the prison north of San Francisco since 1993, 
serving a term of 22 years to life for second-degree murder, robbery, 
grand theft and possession of stolen property. He was convicted in San 
Diego County and had been incarcerated since 1981. 

Authorities say he was transferred to the prison's AIDS treatment after 
testing HIV positive. 

Anderson was last seen during a routine prison head count at 5 a.m. 
Thursday, and his escape was discovered at about 7:15. 

Police say Anderson placed a dummy in his bed, then used something to cut 
through the bars on the second-floor window. He lowered himself with a 
bedsheet, then cut his way through a fence, which was not electrified. 

_- 

Copyright 1997 by United Press International. 

All rights reserved. 

ext file
Friday April 11 3:59 PM EDT 

Convicted killer may be in San Francisco

SAN FRANCISCO, April 11 (UPI) _ Police are investigating whether a 
convicted killer who escaped from the AIDS ward at Vacaville state prison 
was responsible for the alleged kidnapping of a Dixon man that ended at a 
San Francisco motel. 

Police say a man told them today (Friday) that 36-year-old David Wayne 
Anderson had kidnapped him, driving him to San Francisco and leaving him 
bound and gagged at the Royal Motel. 

The victim said Anderson stole his wallet and burgandy pickup truck. 

Anderson escaped from the California Medical Facility's AIDS unit by 
cutting through window bars and lowering himself to the ground with a 
bedsheet. 

Anderson had been at the prison north of San Francisco since 1993, 
serving a term of 22 years to life for second-degree murder, robbery, 
grand theft and possession of stolen property. He was convicted in San 
Diego County and had been incarcerated since 1981. 

Prison authorities say he was transferred to the prison's AIDS treatment 
after testing positive for the deadly disease. 

Anderson was last seen during a routine prison head count at 5 a.m. 
Thursday, and his escape was discovered at about 7:15. 

Police say Anderson placed a dummy in his bed, then used something to cut 
through the bars on the second-floor window. He lowered himself with a 
bedsheet, then cut his way through a fence, which was not electrified. 


 final file 

Thursday April 10 4:02 PM EDT 

Dangerous inmate reported missing

VACAVILLE, Calif., April 10 (UPI) _ Officials at the California Medical 
Facility in Vacaville say (Thursday afternoon) a dangerous prisoner has 
escaped from the high-security prison. Officials say 36- year-old David 
Anderson, who was convicted of second-degree murder in 1981, was 
discovered missing from the prison for physically and mentally disabled 
inmates at 7:15 a.m. He is 5 feet 10 inches tall, weighs 150 pounds and 
has red hair and two teardrop-shaped tattoos under his right eye. 



(Contact: prison, 707-448-6841) 

end of files. 

On Sun, 13 Apr 1997 tuning@ella.mills.edu wrote:

> 			    TUNING Digest 1044
> 
> Topics covered in this issue include:
> 
>   1) RE: Neanderthal
> 	by Johnny Reinhard <reinhard@IDT.NET>
..
> 
> ----------------------------------------------------------------------
> 
> Topic No. 1
> 
> Date: Sat, 12 Apr 1997 17:21:11 -0400 (EDT)
> From: Johnny Reinhard <reinhard@IDT.NET>
> To: Multiple recipients of list <tuning>
> Subject: RE: Neanderthal
> Message-ID: <Pine.GSO.3.95.970412170340.29509A-100000@u2.farm.idt.net>
> 
> Yes, Gary, we were saying the same thing in different ways.  The only
> exception might be that "visually" at least what I saw was pretty
> equidistant.  The odds that the Neanderthal had worked out an "equal
> temperament" are larger than the New York Lottery on a high yield night,
> though.
> 
> Spoofs on April 1st must be more earnestly looked for, I'm afraid.  New
> York's Channel 1 on cable started its news segment with Mayor Guiliani
> taking Janet Reno's spot in D.C.  It was rendered professionally and
> seemed quite believeable...until he said "April's Fools!"
> 
> An example that got my craw (and still disappoints me) was an early Ear
> Magazine article purporting to divine the tuning used by Benjamin Franklin
> in his sole string quartet.  Even aside from the question of authorship of
> the string quartet (no longer thought to be Ben Franklin's in
> musicological circles), this was a non-April's Fools day article that
> pretended 5-limit just intonation for the piece.  
> 
> Sadly, I believed this "article," surrounded by a legacy of valuable Ear
> articles.  I caught up with the admitted perpetrater at
> a La Monte Young concert that we were both performing in.  
> 
> La Monte later told me afterward he felt bad that he had taught the
> just intonation principles to the "funster" in composition lessons.  The
> ideas were lifted and used fancifully under a false name to claim a
> false discovery.  Perhaps if he had written his spoof on a clear April
> 1st I would be more accepting of his deception.
> 
> Johnny Reinhard
> American Festival of Microtonal Music
> 318 East 70th Street, Suite 5FW
> New York, New York  10021  USA
> (212)517-3550/fax (212) 517-5495
> reinhard@idt.net
> 
> 
> ------------------------------
> 
> Topic No. 2
> 
> Date: Sun, 13 Apr 1997 11:24:59 -0500 (CDT)
> From: mr88cet@texas.net (Gary Morrison)
> To: tuning
> Subject: RE: Neanderthal
> Message-ID: <v01541101af766d832c22@[207.207.2.3]>
> 
> >Yes, Gary, we were saying the same thing in different ways.  The only
> >exception might be that "visually" at least what I saw was pretty
> >equidistant.
> 
>    I stand corrected now that you mention it:  The picture shows the
> distance to the hole at what they believe to be the break point toward the
> head-joint side to much smaller than the distance between the two intact
> holes.  But the distance between what they postulate to be the foot-joint
> end to the closest intact hole is, as you pointed out, is only slightly
> smaller that between the two intact holes.

> ------------------------------
> 
> End of TUNING Digest 1044
> *************************
> 


End of Information from ribarbe@garlic.com, signature information follows.

---
   E am not especially clever,  just basically very average,  E merely try
   to maximise thee effectiveness of whatever gifts or abilities E have by
   focusing them towards what E want to happen.
                                                Genesis P-Orridge
finger for PGP pub key                          9 Jul 81   TGHQGB



Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Mon, 14 Apr 1997 23:12 +0200
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA02345; Mon, 14 Apr 1997 23:12:21 +0200
Received: from ella.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA02343
Received: from  by ella.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	 id OAA27181; Mon, 14 Apr 1997 14:09:48 -0700
Date: Mon, 14 Apr 1997 14:09:48 -0700
Message-Id: <199704142034.NAA27168@cnmat.CNMAT.Berkeley.EDU>
Errors-To: madole@mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@ella.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@ella.mills.edu