source file: mills2.txt
Date: Tue, 26 Sep 1995 10:34:05 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & psychoacoustics - Post 3 of 25
---
The psychoacoustic literature overwhelmingly points to the conclusion that, 
first and foremost, the ear/brain system is *complex.*
There is no one simple explanation for how we hear.  The ear/brain system 
generates false information, throws away some of the sound waves 
physically received by the ear, and transforms the rest, either subtly or 
grossly, in the process first of encoding the physical rarefactions and 
compressions of air into neural impulses, and subsequently processing the 
neural information in higher brain centers.
While the physical process by which the organ of Corti responds to incoming 
sound waves and the impulses produced in the auditory nerve are known facts,  the arguments among various investigators arise from the *interpretations* of these facts. Some psychoacoustic 
researchers claim a primary role for the physical acoustic transduction of 
 others claim that the operation of higher brain functions on the encoded nerve impulses is most important (the theory of tuning as a  learned response). 
Because of the extraordinary variation in reliability and competence among 
the various authors of psychoacoustic texts over the last century, and 
because of the rapid progress in the field (which has rendered many earlier 
texts obsolete), the interested reader is advised *not* to unquestioningly 
believe *any* references dated earlier than 1970.
Rather, the reader is advised to *study as much of the 
psychoacoustic literature as possible*, excerpts of which and references to 
which are listen extensively in this article.
Only in this way can the objective reader get a real sense of the 
extraordinary complexity of human hearing, and the provable falsity of 
claims that "the ear is simple," "Helmholtz explained it all," or "so-and-so's 
book on musical acoustics written in the 1950s tells us everything we need 
to know about human hearing."
Reading is not enough.  Since the subject is what we hear and how, the 
reader must also listen and make up hi/r own mind.
After perusing this post, the reader is strongly advised to listen to the 
following tapes/CDs and study the following references: 
[1] "Auditory Perception: An Audio Training Course," by F. Alton Everest. This 
is the best single audio-tape set of examples of classic experiments  
demonstrating the complexity of the hearing process. At $159 this 104-page 
manual and 4 audio cassette set isn't cheap. However, if you read the manual 
and listen to the tapes, you'll quickly learn the basics of how we *actually* 
hear (as opposed to how most musical theory textbooks and all too many 
outdated acoustics and psychology texts *claim* we hear).
[2] "The Science of Musical Sound," by John R. Pierce, 2nd edition, 1992, with 
accompanying audio cassette, covers the simplest elements of 
psychoacoustics.
The cassette is useful for elementary phenomena--binaural beats, 
"streaming," the critical band, consonance of simple vs. complex tones, etc., 
but it cannot subsitute for Everest's far more complete set of 
demonstrations.
[3] Houstma, Rossing and Wagenaars, 1987, "Auditory Demonstrations," 
Philips 1126-061. An 80-track CD compendium of psychoacoustic 
demonstrations of many psychoacoustic phenomena.
[4] Mathews, ed., "Sound Examples: Current Directions In Computer Music," 
MIT Press, 1989.  A disc with a wider range of synthesized psychoacoustic 
examples than the original cassette companion [2] above. 
[5]  "Introduction To the Physics and Psychophysics of Music," 2nd ed. 1973 
and 3rd ed. 1995 by Juan Roederer contains one of the best general 
discussions of the psychoacoustic literature up to that time (1973).  
Roederer covers a wide range of surprising characteristics of the ear/brain 
system which are entirely ignored by less complete, and sometimes 
completely misinformed or out-of-date texts published around the same 
period.  
[6] "The Science of Music Sounds" by Johan Sundberg (1992) is one of the 
best general references on modern psychoacoustics to date. It contains more 
up-to-date citations than any text other than Zwicker and Fastl, and it 
quotes a wider ranger range of sources than any other text but Sundberg 
(1992) and Deutsch (1982).
[7] "The Psychology of Music," ed. Diana Deutsch, 1982, contains an excellent 
cross-section of definitive summaries of various psychoacoustic phenomena 
by the leaders in the field.
[8] "Psychoacoustics: Facts and Models," by Zwicker and Fastly, 1993, is the 
best in-depth discussion of experimental psychoacoustics. It does not 
discuss the various theoretical models of the ear/brain system and does not 
cover streaming, nor does it consider the musical implications of 
psychoacoustics.  Within its limits, however, it's the best reference on the 
experimental side of the field for the specialist.
[9] "Audition" by Pierre Buser and Michael Imbert (translated by R.H. Kay), 
1995, is the most detailed book on the physical structure of the ear/brain 
system to date.  It also offers the most complete picture to date of the 
neural structure of the ear/brain pathway, along with a micrometric
discussion of the various kinds of neurons which repond to
different frequencies, amplitudes, frequency differences, etc. passed along 
the auditory nerve.  This book also does not discuss large-scale theoretical 
models of the ear/brain system, nor does it concern itself with such high-
level phenomena as categorical perception or auditory illusions; but on the 
level of the physical neural structure of the ear/brain pathway it is 
unmatched.
Lastly, readers should *avoid* the statements about psychoacoustics 
contained in many of the following well-meaning but outdated or simply 
erroneous texts:
"The Acoustical Foundations of Music" by Backus, 1969, contains accurate 
information on acoustics and the physics of some musical instruments.  
Unfortunately, almost all of Backus' statements about psychoacoustics had 
been proven incomplete or incorrect by the time of publication of his book 
(1969).
For example:
"The sense of pitch (related to vibration frequency) is thus partly 
determined by the place along the basilar membrane where the vibration 
amplitude is largest. There must be other factors also, since for sounds 
close together in frequency, especially at low frequencies, the difference in 
motion of the basilar membrane does not appear great enough to account for 
the pitch discrimination of a good musician." [Backus, 1969, pg. 81]
This statement is correct but incomplete: the periodicity theory of hearing 
can explain pitch discrimination at low fundamental frequencies but Backus 
never mentions it. In fact the word "periodicity" does not appear in the index 
of his book.
Again:
"Complex tones may also be built up out of harmonics but with the 
fundamental omitted. The ear generally hears such tones as having the 
fundamental frequency, even though there is no actual vibration of that 
frequency present in the sound.  This missing fundamental effect is 
explained on the basis of difference tones, since any two adjacent 
harmonics will have a difference tones of the fundamental frequency." 
[Backus, 1969, pg. 106]
This explanation dates from Helmholtz's time (1860s) and is known to be 
incorrect. "One of the experimental results in Chapter 3 was that the 
detectability threshold for combination tones is significantly lower for 
small than for large frequency differences between the primary tones.  From 
this, the conclusion was drawn that the ear's distortion cannot be 
represented by a frequnecy-independent nonlinear characteristic." [Plomp, 
1966, pg. 121]
"Helmholtz's belief that summation tones and difference tones are the most 
prominent aural combination tones has become very widespread. However, 
recent psychophysical and physiological experiments have revealed that this 
belief is unjustified (Zwicker, 1955; Holdstein, 1970). Evidence for aural 
summation tones has never been found, and difference tones arise only for 
stimuli of relatively high intensity." [Houtsma, Adrian, "What Determines 
Musical Pitch?" Journal of Music Theory, Vol. 17, No. 1, 1973, pp. 139-158] 
Clearly Backus is misinformed and is passing that misinformation along to 
his readers.
Other inaccuraies abound in Backus' text.
Jean-Claude Risset and Max Mathews, two of the most important pioneers in 
analyzing real-world musical timbres, found in 1969 that instrument sounds 
synthesized using fixed harmonic overtones sounded lifeless and artificial. 
"Attempts of synthesis show how grossly inadequate it is to describe the 
tone quality by a simple frequency spectrum."  [Pierce, J.R. , Mathews, M.  
and Risset J-C., "Further Experiments on the Use of the Computer in 
Connection with Music," Grasvener Blaetter, no. 27/28, pg. 93, 1965] 
In 1963--when Backus was still writing his text--Max Mathews pointed out: 
"Our experience has shown how little we now know about relation of the 
quality of sound to various features of waveform." [Mathews, M., "The Digital 
Computer As a Musical Instrument," Science, Vol., 142, November, 1963, pg. 
554]
Risset describes the state of ignorance which prevailed in the field of 
musical acoustics through 1969 (the year in which Backus' text was 
published): "Despite the considerable skill and ingenuity of scientists such 
as Hermann Helmholtz or Dayton C. Miller, early analyses of musical-
instrument tones have not given satisfactory results. (...)  For a long time 
physicists have performed analyses of musical-instrument tones, to find 
out the physical correlates of their tone quality.  Many results of such 
analyses have been published. (...) Computer sound synthesis makes it 
possible to synthesize virtually any sound from a physical description of 
that sound.
"This technique provides a way to check sound analyses: a successful 
analysis should yield a physical description of the sound from which one 
could synthesizer a sound that, to a listener, is nearly indistinguishable 
from the original.
"We have tried to use the results of analyses of musical-instrument tones 
that are to be found in musical-acoustic treatises as input data for 
computer sound synthesis.  In most cases we have obtained sounds that bear 
very little resemblance to the actual tones produced by the instrument 
chosen; in almost all cases the available descriptions of musical-
instrument tones fail the fool-proof synthesis test.  Hence the descriptions 
must be considered inadequate." [Risset, J.C. and Mathews, Max, "Analysis of 
Musical-Instrument Tones," Physics Today, Volo. 22, No. 2, February 1969, 
pp. 23-24.]
By Backus' own admission, his text was based on a series of lectures 
developed over 10 years--which means that his psychoacoustic references 
date from the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s during a critical period of upheaval 
in psychoacoustics caused by the application of computers to music. 
Backus does not mention computer analysis of sound: "The mechanical 
method of analyzing sounds was cumbersome, slow and inaccurate; much 
better equipment is available now for this kind of work.  This equipment is 
electronically operated and therefore much faster; an oscillogram can be 
obtained in one cycle of sound and analysis of the sound wave can be made in 
one second or less." [Backus, 1969, pg. 101]
As Risset points out, the use the oscillograms prevents researchers from 
following the evolution of a sound's spectrum throughout a long time period.  
Thus Backus' techniques are by definition inadequate and out of date.
None of Backus' references hint at the then-unpublished results of 
Guttman, Shepard, Risset and Mathews, which changed the entire field of psychoacoustics.
Thus Backus' book is full of errors and misconceptions about the ear/brain system and should be ignored. 
"Genesis of a Music" by Harry Partch, (1947, 2nd ed. 1974) contains much 
valuable information about just intonation, acoustic instrument-building 
and the fundamentals of musical acoustics.  Alas, virtually all of Partch's 
statements about consonance, dissonance, human hearing and the ear/brain 
system are claptrap.  He cites no psychoacoustic literature dated later than 
1945: Partch was simply unfamiliar with modern experimental evidence 
about the ear/brain system.
"Musical Engineering," by Harry F. Olson is an excellent introduction to the 
physics of sound production in musical  instruments.  The statements about 
musical timbre, the ear/brain system and consonance/dissonance embodied 
the best knowledge up to that time (1957).  Unfortunately, most of what 
Olson says about musical timbre, consonance,  hearing, etc., was disproven 
by the experiments of Wessel, Risset, Ward, and many others in the 1960s 
and early 70s.
""[On] my arrival in the States in 1964...I elected to focus on timbre.  The 
palette  of computer sound, potentially boundless, was in fact quite 
restricted, and one did not know how to generate certain sounds. In 
particular, brassy sounds resisted synthesis efforts. I had to convince 
myself that the recipes of respected acoustics treatises (like H. F. Olson's) 
did not work.  As one may judge, from tones synthesized from such recipes, 
they did not." [Risset, Jean-Claude, "Computer Music Experiments 1964...", 
Computer Music Journal, Vol. 9, No. 1, Spring 1985, pg. 11]
"Fundamentals of Musical Acoustics," by Arthur Benade (1976) contains 
reliable details on acoustics, but some of  Benade's information on sound 
production in various instruments has now been proven incorrect--
particularly, Benade's theory of "regimes of oscillation" for brass 
instruments. 
Benade's text, like Backus, does not contain the word "periodicity" in its 
index. And many of Benade's statements on psychoacoustics contradict the 
results of modern research,  although to his credit Benade himself admits 
this: "The foregoing remarks disagree somewhat with the conclusions drawn 
by the authors of the following thoughtfully written papers:
J.E. F. Sundberg & J. Lindqvist, "Musical Octaves and Pitch," JASA, Vol. 54, 
1973, pp. 922-929," and so on.   
Benade's references on psychoacoustics show strange gaps and a peculiar 
selectivity.  Ohm, Stumpf, Seebeck, Schouten, Plomp, von Bekesy, Sundberg, 
Ward and Burns are not cited in the biolography at the end of the chapter 
"The Acoutical phenomena governing the musical relationships of pitch," 
while Pierce, Mathews, Shepard, Risset, Sundberg, Ward and Burns are not cited in the chapter "Successive Tones: Reverberation, Melodic Relationships, and Musical Scales." 
Instead an article by Steven and Volkman dating from 1940 is cited, 
along with Helmholtz--whose work dates from the 1860s--and "The 
Collected papers of Wallace Sabine," another 19th-century figure. 
For a researcher in the 1970s to write a text whose primary psychoacoustic 
citations hail from the 1860s-1880s is peculiar, to say the least. Like Hall, 
Benade is a physical acoustician whose bibliography and reference lists 
betrays a scanty knowledge of modern psychoacoustics, and an unsavory 
penchant for discarding results with which his simplistic mathematical 
models disagree.
Rossing, "The Physics of Music," 1993, is a comprehensive discussion of the 
physical basis of acoustic instrument timbre, but it contains very little 
information about psychoacoustics.  To be fair, that was not Rossing's focus.  
Still, the text contains nary a mention of Wessel's streaming phenomenon, 
no reference to Ward, Corso, Pikler, Sundberg and Terhardt's findings  on the 
universal preference for stretched octaves, fifths and thirds; no information 
on how pitch perception is affected by masking, context, tone length, etc.; 
no distinction twixt physical and perceptual pitch or physical and 
perceptual loudness, etc.
Other texts may prove popular.  Before believing any reference on 
psychoacoustics, be sure to check its date. Many pre-1970 acoustics text 
either lack important psychoacoustic data, are outdated, or contain a wealth 
of outright misinformation parrotted from Rameau, Mersenne and Helmholtz.
Check the bibliographies of these suspect texts--notice how few post-1945 
papers are cited, and how often the authors take issue with well-known and 
accepted results from the 60s, 70s, 80s and 90s verified independently by 
many reserachers in psychoacoustics on 4 continents.  Lastly, simply 
compare what you hear on F. Alton Everest's tapes and the Houtsma, Rossing 
and Wagenaars disc and the Mathews "Sound Examples: Current Directions in 
Computer Music" disc with claims made by the author in question.
--mclaren 
 

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Tue, 26 Sep 1995 21:23 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id MAA17646; Tue, 26 Sep 1995 12:22:26 -0700
Date: Tue, 26 Sep 1995 12:22:26 -0700
Message-Id: <199509261918.AA04185@net4you.co.at>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu