source file: mills2.txt
Date: Fri, 29 Sep 1995 09:24:03 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & Psychoacoustics - Post 6 of 25
---
MYTH: THE OPERATION OF THE EAR CAN BE
EXPLAINED AS THAT OF A FOURIER ANALYZER,
WITH SOME SLIGHT MODIFICATIONS.
FACT:  Today there are 3 competing models which
explain how the ear/brain system operates, and 
some experimental data supports each hypothesis
and contradicts the others.  Each theory has enjoyed
proponents for more than 100 years, primarily
because many aspects of the ear's behaviour cannot 
be explained by means of Fourier analysis.
---
During the late 19th and early 20th
century, rapid advances in technology allowed
scientists to subject both the place theory
and the periodicity theory of hearing
to ever-more-sophisticated tests.
"On the basis of these different methods,
the fact is now well established that the
stimulated region of the basilar membrane
shifts for decreasing frequency from the
basal to the apical end." [Plomp, 1966,
pg. 108; see also Cioco, 1934; Crow et al,
1934, Oda, 1938; Stevens et al., 1935;
Walzl and Bordley, 1942; Schuknecht,
1960; Kemp, 1935, 1936, Smith, 1947,
Smith and Wever, 1949; Davis et al.
1953; Culler, 1935, Culler et al. 1937,
1943; and particularly von Bekesy,
1944, 1955, 1957.]  von Bekesy
constructed a large and simplified
physical replica of the cochlea which used
the tactile sense of the arm to 
stimulate the organ of Corti and the 
auditory pathway.  He proved that
even in the case of a very broad
maximum of the pattern of vibration,
only a small section was felt
subjectively to vibrate. This lent
strong suport to the view that
the place of maximal stimulation
along  the basilar membrane 
corresponds to pitch.  (That is,
to Helmholtz's theory, with a good
deal of updating; Helmholtz's idea
of "resonators" had to be abandoned,
and many of the details of his theory
modified, to explain experimental
results, as we've seen.)
While von Bekesy's experiments 
provided strong confirmation for
some of the place theory's prediction,
they contradicted other aspects 
of the place theory.   There
remained unresolved, for instance,
the question of how to account
for the ear's extraordinary
sensitivity to tuning differences
of individual partials and of
the fundamental frequency of
the sound wave itself.  WIth only
3000 hair cells each spaced 9 microns apart,
this was difficult to explain. Known pitch
discrimination would demand sensitivity to
stimulation on the basilar membrane measured
in fractions of a micron,  even though the measured
width of the travelling wave on the basilar membrane
is many times that width. (This objection
was originally raised to Helmholtz's 
now-obsolete hypotheses of the
1860s, and it still bedevils advocates
of the modern place theory.) Moreover,
if pitch sensitivity were due solely to the hairs
 lining the basilar membrane, and not to neural
processing, there would have to be far more
hairs than the known 3000 inner hair cells 
(electron microscopy has shown that
the remaining 12,000 outer hair cells serve 
an ancillary function, rather than a direct 
freqency-detection role.  This is also supported
by data from the action potentials of the
two classes of stereocilia as obtained by
microelectrodes.) "The two types of coupling can
therefore be associated with the different
roles of the two types of hair cell in cochlear
function, inner hair cells detecting the movement
of the [basilar] membrane, and the outer hair cells
helping to generate it." [Pickles, James O., "An
Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing," Academic
Press, 1988, 2nd ed., pp. 158-159] 
It is also difficult to explain pitch perception of
sounds with low but missing fundamentals: 
"Suppose high harmonics generate the low pitch.
They wil be relatively closely spaced and will not
be resolved by the auditory stytem. Recognition of
the psectral pattern will not therefore be possible,
but hte harmonics wil eb able to interact in the
nervous system to produce periodically varying
activity.  Temporal theories are therefore supported."
[Pickles, James O., "An Introduction to the Physiology
of Hearing," Academic Press, 1988, pg. 273]
However, Pickles points out that "This is again an
area which is controversial, and over the years
opinions have swayed in favour of one hypothesis
or the other." (I.e., periodicity or place theory.)
Both theories suffer from the limits imposed 
mathematically by their proposed mechanisms
of action, which are in each case  different
from those observewd: "The lower limit for the place 
principle is believed to be about 150 Hz becuase 
the excitation pattern on the basilar membrane does 
not change with frequencies lower than this limit.
Some investigators think that the temporal principle
codes ptich for the very low frequencies and supplements
the place principle over the midrange frequencies. The
upper frequency limit of the applicability of the temporal
principle is uncertain. Some investigators put this limit
as low as 300 to 400 hz, and others put it as high as
4000 to 5000 Hz." [Gulick, W. Lawrence,
George A. Geschneider and Robert D. Frisina, "Hearing:
Phsyiological Acoustics, Neural Coding, and
Psychoacoustics," Oxford University Press,
1989, pg. 261]
Equally troubling for advocates of the place
theory is the fact when sine tones are used,
the ear displays a completely different consonance/
dissonance curve than that produced by complex
tones--instead of a series of peaks and troughs, a
smooth shifted-bell-curve-like response is seen 
for sine tones.  The Ohm/Helmholtz Fourier theory 
of hearing fails to explain this result.
Moreover, von Bekesy found that
contrary to Helmholtz's presumption,
"it appeared that combination tones
are not due to nonlinear vibration of 
[the timpanic] membrane. Furthermore
he discovered that the introduction
of a negative or positive static
pressure into the external meatus
changed the loudness of difference
tones. This would imply that these tones
are produced in the middle ear." [Plomp,
1966, pg. 111]
"However Wever et al, 1941, conducted
experiments which contradicted von
Bekesy's findings just mentioned. ...
Further investigations...suggested that
the main source of combination tones
must be sought in the sensory 
processes, where the microphonic
potential is evoked, and not in the
mechanical part of the inner ear (Wever
and Lawrence, 1954)" [ Plomp, 1966, 
pg. 111] 
In addition, the experiments of von Bekesy,
who did more than any other researcher to
put the place theory of hearing on a modern
scientific basis, were also open to considerable
doubt. " Von Bekesy's observations
have been questioned on two grounds. Visual
observations mean that the vibration amplitude
had to tbe at least of the order of the wavelength
of light, and the high intensities (130 dB SPL) 
necesssary make extrapolation to a more 
physiological range unjustified. Secondly, his
measurements were performed on cadavers. It is
now known that not only does the experimental
animal have to be alive, but the cochlea has to be
in extremely good phisological condition, to
show a satisfactory mechanical response."
[Pickles, James O., "An Introduction to the 
Physiology of Hearing," Academic Press, 1988,
end ed., pg. 40]
In short, investigations began
to suggest that many important 
auditory phenomena could only be
explained by the software, not the
hardware, of the ear/brain system--
that is, by the brain itself. "[For] the
phenomenon...once called "periodicity
pitch" [there are] alternative explanations...
known as "pattern" theories.  They suppose that
the auditory system, by recognizing that the tones
sounded are the upper harmonics of a low tones, 
supplies the missing fundamental that would have
generated them. This is again an area which is
controversial, and over the years opinions have swayed
in favor of one hypothesis or the other." [Pickles, James
O., "An Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing," 
Academic Press, 1988, 2nd. ed., 1988, pg. 273]
Clearly by the 1980s much of the  support for the
place  theory of hearing had crumbled.  In 1984 Pierce
writes: "Helmholtz accomplished a great deal despite the 
limitations of the technology available to him.
Yet he reached false conclusions. He believed the perception 
of musical pitch depends on the presence of the fundamental 
frequency. This is not true for low keys on the piano keyboard,
 or for orchestra chimes, or for bells. HIs other false conclusion
was that the relative phases of sinusoidal components do not 
affect the timbre of  a sound." ["The Science of Musical Sound,"
Pierce, J.R. , 1992, pg. 185; see also "Tone Segregation by Phase: 
On the Phase  Sensitivity of the single ear," Kubovy and
Jordan, JASA, Vol. 66, No. 1, 1979, pp.  100-106]
Still, the place hypothesis accounts very convincingly for 
at least a few  characteristics of the ear/brain 
system: it explains how the ear can resolve complex sounds into
separate pitches, explains the function and structure of some
of the mechanical components of the inner ear, it explains 
elegantly the near-logarithmic nature of pitch, and it explains why
very close tones are heard as being identical in pitch.
On the other hand, the place theory does *not* explain why stretched 
intervals significantly larger than those predicted
by the small whole number ratios (or numerological, essentially
Kabalistic) theory of  consonance are universally preferred to 
so-called "pure" intervals (which in psychoacoustic tests
are consistently heard as "flat" or "too narrow").  Nor does the modern 
place theory explain combination tones, (as mentioned above), or 
the fact that two inharmonic-series tones matched to an inharmonic-
series scale sound strongly consonant (Risset, 1978, 1984, 1985; 
Sethares, 1992; Geary, 1980; Pierce, 1966; Carlos, 1987; Plomp and
Levelt, 1965, Kameoka and Kuriyagawa, 1969); nor does the 
place theory explain (or predict)  modern auditory illusions--
Shephard's tones,  Risset's tone containing ten 1180-cent
intervals which when transposed UP an octave DROPS 
in audible pitch by a perceived 20 cents, etc.
All of these phenomena *can* be explained by the periodicity 
theory of hearing as emergent  properties of an autocorrelation
system.
However, the periodicity theory itself has a number of problems.
It does not explain the universal human preference for stretched
octaves, fifths and thirds, a preference found in the earliest
experiments performed on measured intervals and in all 
double-blind psychoacoustic tests performed for 150 years 
since;  the periodicity theory of hearing cannot account for the 
fact that pitches very close together create a "chorus" effect 
instead of massive dissonance. By contrast, the broad region
of general stimulation of the basilar membrane around the
much narrow region of maximal stimulation--one of the hallmarks
of the place theory--explains this effect simply and clearly.
The phenomenon of combination tones is poorly explained by *both*
competing hypotheses. As Plomp points out, "This problem applies
both to place pitch and periodicity pitch. If pitch is based on the place
of maximal vibration, it is essential for hearing a combination tone that
the corresonding place of the basilar membrane is stimulated. Then the
question may be asked of how this can be accomplished by sensory
processes of hair cells at a distant place of the cochlea. The ascertainment
of Six (1956) that cochlear microphonics correponding to combinationg tones have their maximum at the same place as the primary tones, contradicts this possibility.
If, on the other hand, pitch is based on the periodicity of nerve impulses, 
the problem arises how impulses that  are synchronous with the frequency of combination tones can be initiated when the waveform of cochlear
michrophonics is flattened (the common form of distortion)" [Plomp, 1966, pg. 121]
Summing up, James Pickles points out that "Frequency difference limens
are very much smaller than cirtical bands. Two mechanisms are possible.
For instance, the subject may detect shifts in the place of excitation
in the cochlea. This is called the "place theory." Or he may used temporal
information.  We know that the firing int he auditory nerve is phase-locked
to the stimulus waveform up to about 5 khz. In this theory, called the
"temporal" [or "periodicity] theory, the subject discriminates the
 two tones by using the tme interval between the neural firings. It is not
clear which of the two mechanisms is used.  Indeed the controversy has been
active for more than 100 years, and the fact that it is not yet settled shows
that we still do not have adequate evidence.  Auditory physiolgoists divide
into three groups, namely those that think only temporal information is used, those that think only place information is used, and an eclectic
group, who suppose that temporal information is used at low frequencies,
and only place information at high." [Pickles, James O., "An Introduction
To the Physiology of Hearing," Academic Press, 2nd ed., 1988, pg. 271]
The implications for musical tuning are mixed.  Because no clear evidence
has emerged in favor of any of the three major theories of hearing, 
no single tuning can be considered to "privileged" or uniquely suited
to the human ear.  On the other hand, because of the mixed results
from pscyhoacoustic experiments, the data examined so far would
tend to support the use of any of the major categories of musical
tuning: namely, just intonation, equal temperament, or non-just non-
equal-tempered scales.
The next post will discuss several modern experiments which provide
evidence for the third "pattern recognition" hypothesis of hearing,
 and the implications of all 3 of these hypothetical auditory mechanisms 
for music & tuning.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 29 Sep 1995 19:07 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id KAA23266; Fri, 29 Sep 1995 10:07:19 -0700
Date: Fri, 29 Sep 1995 10:07:19 -0700
Message-Id:  <9509291007.aa21406@cyber.cyber.net>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu