source file: mills3.txt


Subject:  Re: TUNING digest 1132

From:  jstarret@tiger.cudenver.edu

Hi gang-
	I received my first tuning digest in over a week so I don't know if
my previous post was received. I'll restate breifly.
	Forum members, do you have recommended microtonal listening lists,
either hot new or classic and essential? I would like to add your
suggestions to the Recommended Listening section of my Microtonal Music
page (http://www-math.cudenver.edu/~jstarret/microtone.html). The first
(and so far only entry) is John Loffink's recommended list.
	I am still soliciting microtonal MIDI for my background music (John
Sankey's Bach in Werckmeister III is the current MMM). If you have any,
I would welcome an attached file.
	I am also still looking for essays, opinions and instructions on
microtonal music for inclusion as Notes on Microtonality. I welcome
contributions in Word, Word Perfect plain text or HTML. No opinion too
crazy!
	Finally, I heard Bobby McFerrin doing his Circle Songs on the
Sessions at West 54th telivision show. His group, consisting of 5 men
and 5 women did an hour of completely improvised vocal music. The
performance was joyous and spiritual (in the sense that they were filled
with the spirit of the music) and it couldn't help but be microtonal.
McFerrin would start out with a riff, and through a sequence of
handoffs to other singers, build a complete musical structure over which
he and others would solo. Through subtle conducting he
directed the musicians through the piece, developing the music then
bringing it to a satisfying conclusion. This stuff is really first
rate, and it goes on my recommended list. It was interesting to hear
the differences in pitch set choices made by the different soloists.
Bobby seemed to consistently sharp his fifth and use a wide minor
seventh, while another member slightly flatted his fifths, and used minor
sevenths approaching 7/4.

John Starrett



$AdditionalHeaders:  Received: from ns.ezh.nl by notesrv2.ezh.nl (Lotus SMTP MTA v1.1 (385.6 5-6-1997)) with SMTP id C12564DB.0028AFAF; Mon, 21 Jul 1997 09:24:24 +0200