source file: mills2.txt
Date: Mon, 8 Jan 1996 07:48:32 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Bruce Kanzelmeyer's post,
 Neil Haverstick's ideas about Bach,
 guy xenharmonists vs. girl xenharmonists
---
As usual, Bruce Kanzelmeyer makes a number
of excellent points.  His post of some
weeks ago questioned the utility of
ever-more abstract investigations into
the mathematics behind various tuning
systems.
On balance, I agree. In the end the music's
what matters. If the elaborate theories lead
to music that sounds like crap--as in the case
of IRCAM, Pierre Boulez, Brian Ferneyhough,
John Cage, and Milton Babbitt, well, hell.
Dump the theory.  
Go back to noodling on the B3 in a 
lounge in Schenechtady.
Questions of musical quality are necessarily
subjective.  My best take on the state of
the art in xenharmonics is that a whole lotta
good music's being produced.  Some of it
comes out of highly theoretical considerations--
some of it comes out of a wing & a prayer.
Given the unsavory tendency of the 20th century
to take every trend to its wildest possible
extreme, obviously there WILL be theorists who
run amok with math at the expense of music, sanity, 
and general good taste. This is surely a trend
we need to keep an eye on in microtonality,
as in the rest of contemporary music.
The 20th century will NOT be remembered as an
era of moderation, but instead as a profligate and
outlandishly undisciplined period of wild excess
where every possible harebrained scheme was pushed 
to the outermost edge of its wackiest implications, 
and then several light-years beyond.
Well, what else is new?  What other century gave
us both a Hitler AND a Ghandi?  What other century
boasted BOTH a Piet Mondrian AND a Pablo 
Picasso?
But there's room for a lot of different
apoproaches in a field as large as non-12
composition...  As Ted Melnechuk put it,
"Music's house has many mansions."  It seems
unfair to penalize or ostracize good microtonal
composers  just because they arrived at their
 end product via the route of mathematics,
rather than intuition--or whatever other approach
is the fashion de jour.
Incidentally, this is similar to the schism twixt
guy & girl xenharmonists on this forum.  Women
consistently get repelled by the math, the relentless
theory, the endless terminology. Their usual 
objection seems to be: 
"Where's the music???"
Guys seems to be afflicted with a certain amount of
"number macho."  Something along the lines of, "Hey!
MY list of intervals is bigger than YOURS!"
Women have persistently  called fsr more discussion of
aesthetc isses in microtonal music...  A topic
which male subscribers to this forum appear to be
unwilling to touch.
Not sure why.
(There are exceptions. Laudably, the Scarlet Aardvark.)
Maybe aesthetic concerns are too touchy-feelie?
Maybe talking about the MUSIC, rather than the
NUMBERS, would leave the males a wee bit...vulnerable? 
Or perhaps such colloquy might even touch upon 
(horror of horrors!) the EMOTIONAL impact of 
xenharmonic music, rather than this or that 
komma or skhisma?
Well...hard to say.
But it do bear thinkin' on, chilluns.
Typical of a sizable contingent on this forum, Bruce
evokes the horrors of musical chaos and paints 
a glowing picture of Appolonian order.  Of course,
some of us LIKE chaos.  Some of us view chaos as
a fertile maelstrom wherein brew dandy new
worlds of harmony & melody...  As Ilya Prigoine
points out, order only appears in thermodynamic
systems at the edge of disorder.  Without uncontrolled
and promiscuous chaos, a system tends to enter
stagnant cyclic states.
Of course the JI crowd will view this notion with the
utmost horror..."son cosas de la vidas."
Re: Bruce's objection that listeners will inevitably
disagree, etc. etc., & there's a margin of error
in all auditory systems, therefore the psychoacoustic
data can be explained away...
Nope.
If we were talking about ranges of error or some
such, the complexities of the human auditory system
COULD be swept under the rug.  But it ain't
that simple.
Alas, the psychoacoustic data clearly show that
many auditory stimuli produce contradictory
results when applied under different circumstances.
This is a conclusion that CANNOT be swept under
the rug.  NO amount of talk about "ranges of error"
or "imperfections in the ear/brain system" will
suffice to esplain away outright paradoxes and
contradictions in the human auditory system.
This kind of argument was put forward in the 1870s
to bolster Helmholtz's crumbilng Fourier analysis
model of the ear.  The argument didn't explain away
Seebeck's siren experiment, the extreme contradiction
twixt calculated jnds and observed just noticeable
differences, nor did it explain combination tones,
the Zwicker tone, or any of the other paradoxes
and puzzles which continue to plague modern 
psychoacousticians.
Alas, such arguments failed in the 1870s and they
still fail today.  In the end, the only resonable
conclusion is that a LOT of complex phenomena are
taking place in the ear/brain system, many of
which appear to require contradicotry and mututally
exclusive explanations...and no one model of hearing
 suffices to explain even a significant fraction of
the extant data.
As for Neil Haverstick's deification of Bach...well,
permit me to demur.  Bach was a fine composer who
also churned out a fair amount of Muzak.  His cantatas
are classic Muzak, the notebook of Anna Magdalena
Bach is pure make-work, and many of his chorales
and even a few of the 48 constitute mere busywork
noodling-around.
Bach was certainly an excellent composer when he
was at the top of his form.  Equally certainly,
he wasn't always.
In particular, the destructive idea that no human
can excel Bach is bizarre and outlandish.
In fact, Bach's lute suites (which are transcriptions
of his cello suites, by the way) are good music...
But infinitely inferior to the far more impressive 
lute masterpieces of the late renaissance.
John Dowland in particular wrote many superb pieces
 for lute which put Bach's lute suites to shame.
The idea that Bach is some sort of unapproachable
god strikes me as just plain silly. 
As for Neil's contention that there are very few
great pieces of xenharmonic music, well, 
bosh and twaddle.  I can name 20 masterpieces
of xenharmonic music without breaking a sweat:
[1] Easley Blackwood's 15-tone etude
[2] Easley Blackwood's 23-tone etude
[3] Paul Lansky's "Late Autumn"
[4] Richard Boulanger's "In Slow Glass"
[5] Gary Lee Nelson's "Fractal Mountains"
[6] William Schottstaedt's "Water Music"
[7] Jean-Claude Risset's "Inharmonique"
[8] John Chowning's "Stria"
[9] Larry Polansky's variations on "My Funny
 Valentine"
[10] Ivor Darreg's "Prelude No. 1 for 19-tone
guitar"
[11] Ezra Sims' "Quintet" (1987)
[12] Charles Ives' "Three Pieces for Quarter-Tone
Piano"
[13] Julian Carillo's "Prelude A Cristobal Colon"
[14] Ivan Vyshnegradsky's "Quartet en quarts a tons."
[15] Alois Haba's opera "Die Mutter"
[16] Edgard Varese's "Arcana" 
[17] Louis & Bebe Barron's tape score for "Forbidden Planet"
[18] Ben Johnston's Quartet No. 4
[19] Mayumi Reinhard's "Peach"
[20] Jonathan Harvey's "Mortuos Plango Vivos Voco"
 And I could rattle off 30 or 40 other masterworks of
non-12 music without any trouble at all.  But, as always,
there's neither time nor space.
The idea that there are "very few xenharmnic masterpieces"
just doesn't jibe with the facts. On the cotnrary: it seems
clear that xenharmonic composition as a field has
generated a hugely disproportiate number of masterworks--
and at a rate that seems to be *constantly increasing.*  
--mclaren 

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Tue, 9 Jan 1996 02:48 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id RAA21888; Mon, 8 Jan 1996 17:48:11 -0800
Date: Mon, 8 Jan 1996 17:48:11 -0800
Message-Id: <199601090147.BAA22400@smtp-gw01.ny.us.ibm.net>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu