source file: m1359.txt
Date: Thu, 19 Mar 1998 16:02:48 EST

Subject: Temperament Festival

From: A440A <A440A@aol.com>

Ok, now, everybody remain calm...........(:)}}}}}
<< The only tuning class they're touting in advance is something called
'Temperament Festival' by someone named Skip Becker. If it is just a
chance to rejoice at one's ability to produce identical 12-tet every time,
any other tuners who are likely to be there and I should get together and
picket it...>>

      All the classes are published well in advance, but this Temperament
Festival is anything but ET!!!!!   
    Skip is going to have a variety of temperaments,(there are also others in
there tuning their own, etc....),  and there is going to be a crowd of
technicians that will be there to judge, listen, allow how this and that, and
just in general, get their temperament awareness raised.  This is good, for
all of us. 
     The assault on ET, that McClaren so pointedly gave voice to on this forum
in years past, is now joined by a number of piano technicians. There is good
solid controversy on the Pianotech list right now, concerning ET vs WT vs MT,
(nobody championing Pythagorean or Just, at the moment).  We have the staunch
adherents of ET, cursed as they are with the status quo, but the temperament
crusade is continuing to advance.  
      I don't resent or dislike ET (it's been worth a great deal of money to
me all these years), but I, like a growing number of tuners, have come to
dislike the hegemony of it.  This is the target  for all of us that are into
alternative tunings of any sort.  Getting the public to take that first step
off of the familiar is the most important thing to get done first, and
professional tuners are in a good position to do it, or at least help.  
     Anne Beetem, Susan Halligan, and I have all released CD's that feature
tunings other than ET.  There is more to follow, I am sure.  
     I have been listening to H'sticks latest, as well as Kirnberger and his
buddies.  I like them all 
Regards, 
Ed Foote
Precision Piano Works
Nashville, Tn.