source file: mills2.txt
Date: Thu, 9 Nov 1995 15:44:02 -0800

Subject: guitars, slides & harmonics - simple help wanted

From: chad@cix.compulink.co.uk (Charles Dignes)

In-Reply-To: <199511091619.IAA05972@eartha.mills.edu>
Dear All,

I have just returned from gigging in Istanbul, home of the 
multi-fretted long-necked lute (saz et al.), still coughing the 
cigarette-smog of 15million chain-smoking Turks out of my poor 
old lungs, but happy and bearing fine spoils. I can report that 
micro-tonalism is alive and well; I told my Gypsy friends about 
you all and they said to send greetings. But Lachio!

This + the many recent wild and whacky postings has inspired me 
to take down my good old occidental 5-string open-tuned 
acoustic guitar and play about with an old slide thing I found 
some years back. 

Seeing as how there be less mathematically-challenged folk out 
there than myself, I was hoping one such kind person might be 
able to help me with a couple of problems that have been 
nagging at me for the last decade or so. 

1. 
Firstly, does anyone have an idea of the mathematical 
expression (algorithm?) for the following:

* Get acoustic guitar and slide.
* Place slide at the octave, i.e. half-way point of the string, 
strike both sides. Result = same note.
* If you then move the slide up (or down) and continue to 
strike both sides of the string, certain "nodes" emerge in 
which with each side of the string harmonises, according to the 
relationship - i.e. "perfect" third, fourth, fifth etc... 
For example: if the string in question is a G, then going up 
the neck towards the nut you will pass from:

unison (g)  | (g) - at the half-way length of the string, to:
octave (d') | (d) - at the third-way length of the string.

Although many of these nodes are the expected ones, plenty are 
"out" of the standard "g" harmonic series. For example, the 
minor 3rd is near enough a quarter-tone and the 7th is 
decidedly skew.

Questions:
Maybe people have been going on abut this under some other 
name, if so what is this sort of harmonic collection called? 
What is the mathematics of this as a whole series? Are there 
any proper big compositions & works in this field of, I suppose 
I'd call it "bifurcative-JI"? Is it possible to play this in 
yet another plane (i.e have not 2 but 3 floating sliding points 
in the frequencu spectrum)? Is this a bit like what Brian 
McLaren is talking about with rhythm?

2. 
My second request is of a similar nature, but more practical 
and applies to anyone who is interested in the visualisation of 
fretless finger-stopping (as opposed to diagrams of music!), 
who has a computer and means op generating waving nice wavy 
patterns (sine, cosine will do). 

I have this thing called a cümbüs (that's pronounced jumbush 
with puckered lips for the u umlauts). It's about the hardest 
animal I ever encountered but essentially it is a 12-string 
fretless banjo. The neck is bolt-on and the fingerboard is made 
of (if you please) a formica strip. Cheap & cheerful and the 
best friend the hard-working 7-days-a-week, 5-hours-a-night 
Istanbul Gypsy twangers have. Louder than an Ud, less of a loss 
if drunken revellers are sick on it, have to be controlled etc. 
Also good for cooking up some rice in.

If I can provide the exact dimensions of the fingerboard, 
tuning of strings, string scale length etc... can anyone knock 
me up a nice wavy pattern that approximates the "tree of life" 
design found on all the nice old bouzoukis? This is a 
traditional sinuous curvy thing with vine leaf bits coming off 
it. I have PC running MS things and access to Quark and other 
bigger apps.

Essentially I am looking for a visual aid to a fretless 
fingerboard that I can cut into the fingerboard so I can 
encourage myself to play other forms of tuning. I imagine 
something a bit more modern than vine-leaves, lots of 
super-imposed sine and cosine waves that produce nice, moire 
patterns, super-imposed over standard, or JI or 14ET fretting 
marks etc...

Hoping this is of interest or at least germane to the current 
(wonderful high level) of postings & discussion, and apologies 
if not. All responses gratefully received.

Lu 
aka: chad@cix.compulink.co.uk
London, UK


Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 10 Nov 1995 04:23 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id SAA25068; Thu, 9 Nov 1995 18:23:44 -0800
Date: Thu, 9 Nov 1995 18:23:44 -0800
Message-Id: <Pine.3.89.9511092005.A599-0100000@styx.ios.com>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu