source file: m1608.txt
Date: Sun, 27 Dec 1998 21:28:12 -0500

Subject: a gentleman and... an academic

From: "Debra Shea-Stearns" <stearns@capecod.net>

In the TUNING digest 1607 (topic No. 16), Carl Lumma wrote:

"…Partch would have been greatful for the DX7. He who says otherwise
is a gentleman and... an academic."

While I'm certainly not an academic (or can I claim to be the ‘gentleman’ so
depicted in this context), I am reasonably certain that I don’t really know
much about this or that intent of someone I never knew… so this may very
well be true; 'Partch would have been grateful for the DX7'... I can’t
say—But I will offer a personal point of view or two, to which (I am fairly
certain) someone is bound to have some heartfelt objections.

I do not own a copy of Partch’s ‘GENESIS OF A MUSIC’. But I have taken it
out of the library (a couple of times), and seem to recall a passage in
which he talks about (new?) instruments and how music has always grow around
and out of them... Though I’ve no doubt butchered the judicious literatim of
what he wrote, hopefully I’ve conveyed something of it as well (?).

It is my humble opinion that the more unforgettable characteristics of
Partch’s music (assuming that the actual music one creates carries with it
something distinct from the ideologies that buttress it) are tied a lot
tighter to the creation and implementation of new instruments, than they are
the advancement of a tuning that happened to resolutely embrace aural
causation… And though the tuning the instruments the ideologies and the man
and the music all seem inseparable to me now... I for one am pretty darn
thankful someone was seduced by carpentry!

Would the ‘inimical leer’ that permeates much of his writing on the subject
tuning have lost a bit of its punch (or charm) had his radical, spirited
MUSIC not shined so brilliantly? I (for whatever that’s worth) certainly
would have found the shrillness of the intonation reform minded rhetoric
unendurable had the music been some underwhelming, imaginatively anemic
quotidian—'Natural, reasonable, and inherently pleasing...' or not.

Would one with alternative tuning inclinations truly find an unanticipated
audio encounter with an instrument such as Ivor Darreg’s Megalyra any less
‘impressive’ or ‘interesting’ were it tuned to (and played in) 12TET? Would
the same go for a DX7... Does a compilation like EMI’s 1st ‘GRAVICHORDS,
WHIRLIES AND PYROPHONES’ make a better ‘argument’ for the design and
implementation of interesting new instruments than a compilation like the
tuning forums ‘A MICROTONAL MUSIC EXPERIENCE’ does for the design and
implementation of interesting new tunings?

In the end I would suppose that the divination's either in the work, or it
ain’t, regardless of whether it is in the gross tactical bone and marrow of
the procedure (or it ain’t), and ultimately that it’s more or less for each
to say…

As if its not clear by now—I profoundly disagree with the [arch] remedial
minded ‘intonationalist’… I tend to see the systemic components of music
(and be those components the beneficial mediation of de-occulting
literatim... ‘where natural phenomena obeys blind necessity’, or be they
some detachments from the physically exact… ‘at what cross-purpose the world
is dreamt’), as a varied lot of inspiriting, and metaphorically
speaking—enclitic understandings, put into their determinant position by the
successful (and influential) realization of their MUSIC…

But this is not exactly why I wrote, so I guess I’ve run out my "personal
point of view or two…" Intonation and music are not the same… Having said as
much I would hope not to hie to my grave having said, "therefore; mutually
exclusive…"

Respectfully, D—Stearns