source file: m1412.txt
Date: Mon, 11 May 1998 18:36:58 +0000

Subject: Integer ratio harmonics etc

From: "Patrick Ozzard-Low" <patrick.ozzard-low.itex@norfolk.gov.uk>

The following may be helpful in the 'integer ratio harmonics' 
for acoustic sustaining instruments dscussion (sorry if some of it 
reduplicates stuff already discussed, but confirmation/contrast 
can't be a bad thing).  

Judith C. Brown, 'Frequency ratios of spectral components of musical 
sounds', Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Vol. 99, No. 
2, 1996, pp. 1210-19.

The article places considerable emphasis on methodology and accuracy 
of measurement.  Some quotes and comments:   

"A recently developed high resolution frequency tracker. has made it
possible to measure the ratios of the frequencies of the upper
harmonics of a sound with respect to its fundamental frequency with
high accuracy.  Calculations were carried out on digitised sounds
produced by a clarinet, alto flute, voice, piano, violin, viola and
cello." (p. 1210). 

For the sustained instruments in this group the frequency ratios of
spectral components (in this study the number of harmonics 
considered (or at least, included in the graphs provided) for each 
instrumental sound varied from 5 to 25) were in what Brown calls 
'exact' integer relationship - that is, as exact as the accuracy 
which the measuring process itself allowed.  As I understand this, it 
was shown that spectral components will normally deviate from an 
ideal harmonic series by no more than about 2-3 cents, but that 
relative to the accuracy of the calculation smaller deviations could 
not be detected. 

"Continuously driven instruments such as the bowed strings, winds, 
and voice have phase-locked frequency components with frequencies in 
the ratio of integers to within the currently achievable measurement 
accuracy of about 0.2%.  Since frequency fluctuations greater than 
the measurement accuracy are inherent in any sound produced by a 
human performer [on such an instrument], improvement of the 
measurements is unnecessary.' (ibid., p. 1218). 

I can't pretend to understand the detail of the methodology 
to explain it to you.  But would be particularly interested to hear 
Dave Hill's and other's reactions to the methodology, should 
they be familiar with the article.

Also, more important, - Dave,  have you published your own 
results? Sorry if I missed this somehow.

Thanks.

Patrick O-L