source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sat, 3 Feb 1996 14:42:50 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Xenharmonics on a broken
 shoestring
---
While it's easy to gripe about the lack
of this or that sophisticated synthesis
algorithm on today's MIDI synths, it's
sobering to realize how far we've come.
In many ways we live in the golden age of
xenharmonics.
A whole lot of dirt cheap fully retunable
MIDI synthesizers are available used--and
most of 'em for a pittance.  For example,
the prospective microtonalist can today
grab a used TX81Z for about $250, or a
used VFX for about $600.  These are both
excellent synthesizers.  Add an antique DOS
286 machine, used, for another $200 or
so, tack on a DOS sequencing program
like Cakewalk or Texture, a cheap MIDI
interface, and you can do an astounding
amount of sophisticated microtonal
composition.
Move up to a Windows 386 machine (for
about $100 more) and a program like
Finale, and you've got the ability to
score and perform compositions of
a complexity unthinkable a few years
ago. You can record xenharmonic scores
that world-class ensembles would have
had to practice for 6 months to perform!
None of this was possible just 10 years
ago.
So much inexpensive high-quality
equipment has washed up in the USED
section of the classified ads today 
and in the backs of cheapo guitar shops
that it's mind-boggling.
A look at a 1986 issue of "Keyboard" puts
the situation in focus--back then, analog
MIDI synths were the state of the art. 
2,000 note sequencers running on the 
Commodore 64 were considered "powerful."
The only affordable sampler was the Mirage,
and to detwelvulate *that*, you had to
buy an alternative operating system from
Dick Lord in New Hampshire.
Recently, US Snail brought me the latest tapes 
by Warren Burt and Gary Morrison.  While both
of these composers have asked me not to 
review their work in public, they probably
wouldn't mind my saying that their 
latest work is excellent.  
And in both cases what's especially 
impressive is how much they were able 
to do with modest resources.
Gary Morrison, for instance, has an obsolete 
68030-vintage Macintosh with a DAT
machine, a two-track Sound Tools setup,
and an Ensoniq ASR-10.  Yet he's been able
to simulate a very convincing orchestral
wind and percussion ensemble.
Warren Burt has an equally modest set-up.
An "obsolete" 286 DOS laptop, a MIDI
interface, a little A/D-D/A box that hooks
into the computer's parallel port (cost
$150, maximum stereo output rate 22.05
khz), the public-domain program US from
the U of Illinois, a commercial DOS sample
editor, the Buchla Lightning MIDI controller,
a Proteus I, a Roland SCC-1 Sound Canvas
sound card, and a couple of reverb and delay 
boxes, along with an obsolete 13-bit EPS
sampler. (Still an *extremely* useful synth--
as I can testify, since I still use one myself!)
Yet with this modest setup--which wouldn't 
even rate a sneer from a Keyboard or Electronic
Musician reviewer--Warren manages to tease
a kaleidoscope of interesting  music.  
His latest work ranges from digital musique
concrete, to algorithmic music which
uses William Sethares' idea of matching
partials to the microtonal tuning, to pastiches
which employ public-domain algorithmic composition
programs  processing musical material from
neoclassical composers in a 19-tone extension
of serialism.
This kind of fine work done with so-called "obsolete"
MIDI equipment should tell us something important.
In the end, you don't really need a DigiDesign TDM
48-track Power Mac system.  You don't really
need NeXTStep-486 running on an 80686 machine.
You don't really need a monster 16-bit sampler
with 64 or 128 megs or RAM.
This kind of bleeding-edge technology is nice--
but it's not *necessary* to produce good microtonal
music.
In the end, what matters most is imagination and 
ingenuity.  My own computer music never uses
a sampling rate higher than 20 khz; and you
can do a surprising amount with a 20 or 30
khz sampling rate on a 13-bit 1 megaword 
sampler like the EPS.   
Moreover, vintage synths like the 1986 
TX81Z or the 1989 VFX have so many features 
that it's difficult to believe *anyone*
has come close to exhausting their sonic
potential, even though they've been in use for
years and years.
Beyond that, there remains the largely unexplored 
option of combining live acoustic home-built 
xenharmonic instruments with digital synths
in live and recorded performances.
For some reason, microtonalists have long faced off
into oposing groups: the "acoustic only!" camp
and the "digital only!" camp.  But why not mix
and match instruments of both kinds?
Why not combine *both* sound-worlds?  
This is a direction we in the Southern California
micorotnal group have been pursuing for years, 
and it has so far proven fruitful.
Recently I finished building my own copy of a
Harry Partch-style harmonic canon I.
Essentially a monochord multiplied times 44,
with movable bridges for each string, the
instrument turned out to be much simpler
to construct than my forebodings indicated.
Best of all, it cost less than $100.
Yet with a harmonic canon  you can tune up
all the tetrachords listed in John Chalmers
magnum opus "Divisions of the Tetrachord"--
four or five at a time, simultaneously.
Or you can tune up a single tetrachord with
a variety of harmonizations.
You can also get Partch's 29-note, 37-note, 39-note,
41-note and 43-note just scales, or 43-tone
or 41-tone equal temperament.   Not to mention
multiple courses of strings with lesser divisions
of the octave.  The harmonic canon is  an
endlessly useful instrument--it sounds splendid,
yet it's easy to maintain (run emory cloth along
teh strings to get rid of rust once a week, and dust
and oil the wood) and almost trivial to 
build.
Building my own megalyra has proven even
easier, and cost considerably less than $100.  
These instruments require no special carpentry
skills--even a duffer like myself can cut and 
plane maple and pine planks, drill holes, and
screw in 44 piano pins.  Making a megalyra
is literally no more complex than drilling
11 pairs of holes, sinking 11 pairs of
piano pins, and winding tight 11 pairs of 
piano strings across a piezoelectric pickup.
That's essentially all there is.  (Hint: get
used rusted piano pins from a piano repair
shop.  You can emory-cloth the rust off the
pins, and they work just fine. The only real
expense is the piezo pickup, the 11 piano
strings, and the piano tuning hammer.  Once
again, rusted used piano pins work fine.)
Anyone can build these simple xenharmonic
instruments, yet the resulting music
sounds impressive in live performance--
especially when combined with digital MIDI 
synths and/or playback of computer-generated 
soundfiles.
When I see the latest issue of Computer Music
Journal, I have to wonder: Why aren't these
people talking about "more is less" in computer
music?
As Warren Burt has pointed out, in the age of
downsizing, most of our incomes are dropping 
even more rapidly than the price of computer 
hardware--so getting the mostest out of the 
leastest is a matter of real concern.  
It's also a fun challenge.  
So every time that latest, greatest new
synth beckons to me from the music shop
window, a little voice in the back of head 
whispers: You still haven't used more than
1/10 of the capabilities of the equipment 
you've already got!
Frankly, both Gary and Warren  would do us
a favor if they'd  post more about getting 
"the mostest from the leastest."  
Like Ivor Darreg's, their work has produced 
impressive results with very modest resources, 
and we could all learn a thing or two from 
these fine composers.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Sun, 4 Feb 1996 19:47 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id KAA23868; Sun, 4 Feb 1996 10:47:46 -0800
Date: Sun, 4 Feb 1996 10:47:46 -0800
Message-Id:  <9602041045.aa27022@cyber.cyber.net>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu