source file: m1405.txt
Date: Tue, 05 May 1998 11:10:24 -0700

Subject: Steve Vai in Guitar World. and other babbel...

From: Xou Oxno <xouoxno@virtulink.com>

In my ever ending quest to effectively waste
time more efficently, I found this program
this morning and have managed to waste 4 hours so far.

Steve Vai in Guitar World.  http://www.guitarworld.com

Here's the original text:

VAI: I've done some kooky things that involved dividing 
up the fretboard. I have a guitar that has 24 frets to 
the octave and one that has 16 frets to the octave, so
they're untempered. They sound like divine 
dissonance from Venus. And I'm working on a 
new triple-neck that has a six-string, a fretless 
and a 12-string. It has three individual outputs 
for three different amps. I'm writing material where 
I'll be using all three necks at the same time.


I then sent it through the The Altavista Language Transmorgrafier: 

http://www.archive.org/%7Eart/babelphone.html

And came up with a couple of different translations:


VAI: I made some things kooky which implied to divide the fretboard.
I have a guitar which A 24 hoops with the octave and one which have
16 hoops with the octave, thus they are not soaked. They resemble
divine dissonance of dome. And I work with a new triple-neck which
has a six-chain of characters, a fretless and with a 12-string. It
has three various outputs for three different amps. I am material of
writing where I will use each of the three necks at the same time.

VAI: I made some things kooky that implied to divide fretboard. I
have a guitar that the hoops of A 24 with eighth and one that they
have 16 hoops with eighth, therefore they do not soak themselves.
They are resembled come divine dissonance of. And work with a new
triple-neck that a six-linking of characters has, fretless and with
12-string. It has three several exits for three diverse amperes. I
am material of the writing where I will use each one of the three
necks in the same time.

VAI: I formed some things kooky, those suggest, in order to divide
fretboard. I have a Guitarre, which the tapes of A 24 do not soak
themselves with eighth and one, which they have 16 tapes with
eighth, therefore them. They are resembled to come divine Dissonance
of. And work with a new three-fold beginning, which has six six
linking the characters, fretless and with 12-string. It has three
some outputs for three different ampere. I am material of the
writing, in which I use each of the three beginnings in the same
time.

VAI: I have formed some things kooky, those I suggest, in order to
divide the fretboard. I have a Guitarre, than the tapes of To 24 not
inzuppareano same they in eighth and one, than 16 tapes with eighth,
therefore they. They are been similar in order coming dissonance
divine of. And job with a new triple beginning, that it has six six
to connect the characters, fretless and with 12-string. It has three
some escapes for three to ampère different. They are material of the
writing, in which use everyone of the three inizii at the same time.

-- 
* D a v i d        B e a r d s l e y
*           xouoxnoREMOVE-THIS@virtulink.com
*
* J u x t a p o s i t i o n     E z i n e
* M E L A  v i r t u a l  d r e a m house monitor
*
* http://www.virtulink.com/immp/lookhere.htm