source file: m1396.txt
Date: Sat, 25 Apr 1998 16:45:35 -0400

Subject: RE: JI Tuning Resolution

From: "Paul H. Erlich" <PErlich@Acadian-Asset.com>

Gary,

>If you zoom it in on a single period of the tone, you see the peaks and
>troughs of the vibration bobbing up and down, and sometimes moving around
>too.  Regardless of what you attribute that to, it's certainly not a
>strictly periodic wave.  But if you change the time per division so as to
>zoom out to show 10 or so cycles, you can see that the bobbing up and >down
>of the peaks and troughs follows a regular progression from one cycle to
>the next.  Sometimes you can even actually see a peak moving through the
>lower frequency components.

I grant you that typically the wave will not be strictly periodic,
because the player's bowing, lipping, or blowing will not be entirely
steady.

The problem is that if one of the harmonic partials is changing in
amplitude due to this unsteadiness, and you do a Fourier analysis on a
segment of time in which these changes are significant, the Fourier
transform will only be allowed to assign one amplitude to each
frequency. Therefore, the result of the analysis will be that the
frequencies are slightly altered, usually both upwards and downwards
simultaneously, so that interference can simulate the changes in
amplitude. (Try it!) However, as the ear can only resolve one pitch
within each critical bandwidth (and there are nerve-firing periodicities
which supplement the cochlear mechanisms), it will indeed be able to
interpret the signal as having harmonic partials of changing amplitudes.
I'm not saying that one interpretation or the other is more correct; the
problem of describing a waveform as a sum of frequencies each of whose
amplitude changes over time has many equally valid solutions. I'm saying
that the solution relevant for how we hear the tones and how dissonance
might arise with other tones is, in most cases, one where the partials
are harmonic and of changing amplitude. (Looking at peaks and troughs
can be misleading. The way we hear a wave has surprisingly little
correlation with how the wave looks.)

Add the variablity of the overall pitch level and you have another
complication for a traditional Fourier analysis.

If there are indeed overtones of constant amplitude that do not fall
within the harmonic series of the fundamental, there must be an
independent source of energy producing them. I don't think this occurs
too often in any significant proportion in the types of instruments
we're talking about.

>>If you study the mechanics of
>>a 1-component driver, such as a bow, reed, or lips, you will understand
>>that regardless of the extent to which the resonant modes of vibration
>>of the instrument deviate from a harmonic series, the driving mechanism
>>will force the waveform to become periodic,

>Would you apply that to a flute, for example?

I don't think the turbulent airflow that drives a flute is well enough
understood to make this characterization. However, this airflow does
appear to be characterised by "periodic" and "chaotic" regimes of
behavior.

>It sounds like you're suggesting that lips, or a reed for example, can
>only vibrate periodically.  I personally am aware of no evidence to that
>effect.  They certainly don't have the physical characteristics of a system
>that vibrates only in harmonics, notably a mechanical transmission line.

Under a steady airflow, the Bernoulli effect that explains their motion
predicts a periodic behavior. Even without the rest of the instrument to
dictate where the fundamental will resonate with a minimum of input
energy, the mouthpieces of these instruments can be used to create a
musical tone with harmonic overtones (albeit highly variable overall
pitch). The timbre of instruments, as I'm sure you know, is highly
dependent on the ability of the instrument to resonate at harmonic
overtones of a given resonance. This is becuase the lips/reed are highly
non-linear, creating a host of harmonic overtones along with the
sinusoudal fundamental that a simple Bernoulli model would predict. Now
the extent of this non-linearity is dependent on the physical
characteristics of the reed/lips, which can be constantly altered by the
player, even if he/she is not meaning to do so. Hence the amplitude of
the partials can vary, sometimes wildly, rendering the waveform
aperiodic. However, for the time domains relevant for the ear's
analysis, this does not lead to any relevant alterations in the
frequencies of the partials.

>>> . . . JI does what it does more in the lower harmonics
>>>than the upper ones
>>I think Harry Partch would disagree with you there.

>That of course is why I said "to the degree that JI does what it
>does...":  To include the possibility that that degree might be zero.  Or
>very high.

>In other words, I was not expressing an opinion along those lines;  just
>stating that if that were true, then the fact that the lower harmonics are
>closer to harmonic than the would be relevant.

>Boy, am I confused!