source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sat, 4 Nov 1995 11:53:34 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Bach wars
---
Many forum subscribers have added their 2 cents
to the long-running "Bach wars."  For my part,
permit me to say that the posts by all concerned
were absolutely superb.  Full of detailed quotes,
specific references, cogent reasoning.  Paul Hahn,
Gary Morrison, Manuel Op de Coul, Aleksander Frosztega,
Johnny Reinhard and Helmut Wabnig did a marvellous 
job of distilling the references and citing competing
sources.
As to who is right or wrong, that is not nearly
as interesting as the citations themselves.  This
controversy, raked over in admirable detail, gives
*all* of us the references and direct quotes required
to decide for ourselves.  That should be the goal of 
scholarship...and in the "Bach wars" series of posts,
all subscribers concerned have adhered to high 
standards of scholarship and logical reasoning.
Unlike so many posts in which sarcasm, appeals
to authority, or sheer naysaying substituted for
a reasoned debate, the "Bach wars" have proven 
enormously enlightening.   Reading this series of
posts has taught me a good deal about an important
question in the history of tuning.  Congratulations
to everyone who posted on the subject.  You've all
shown us how interesting and educational this forum
can be at its best.
---
As to the specific question of the "Bach wars" posts--
"What tuning did Bach use?"--it does not behoove me
to speak directly, given the abysmal nature of my
ignorance about the period and the people involved.
However, some general observations seem in order:
[1] "Statisticum radix scientiae malorum."  It is my
firm belief that misuse of stastistics is the root of all
bad science. (As opposed to pseudo-science, like the
N-rays which destroyed Rene Blondlot's reputation 
in 1906 and the abominable E-rays which constitute
such a blot on the credibility of German science
today.  E-rays are nothing but dowsing performed on
purported electromagnetic radiations, which radiations
can neither be detected by any known instruments nor
cut off by any known form of shielding.  Yet they 
"cause cancer."  What's the German word for "scam"?)
One of the worst uses of statistics is what I call 
"stripmining the noise floor."  When you've got too
little data to form a reliable representation of a
statistical universe, or when you've got dribs and
drabs of data collected at time A, time B, time C,
under wildly different conditions and with dubious
controls...you're basically pushing linear parametric
statistical methods beyond their useful limits. You're
trying to statistically analyze noise...trying to
make soup out of dishwater, mathematically speaking.
The result?
Hard numbers that look convincing but turn out to be
"junk science."
My best guess is that the "What tuning did Bach use?"
controversy is undecidable because all participants
concerned are stripmining the noise floor.
---
Let me give some concrete examples:
Statistical analysis of Bach's harpsichord compositions
looks like a reasonable strategy at first glance. However,
Bach's collected harpsichord compositions do not form
a reliably complete representation of an underlying
statistical universe for the following reasons:
[1] Bach wrote his harpsichord compositions over a number
of years.  Some were penned in Cothen, some earlier, some
later.  If Bach's style of composition changed, this throws
into doubt one of the underlying assumptions of a statistical
analysis: namely, that all samples derive from the same
statistical universe.  To use an acoustics analogy, this is
like taking half your measurements of reverberation time
in a closet and half your measurements in Carnegie Hall.
You've got a mixed set of data and you're lumping all the
data points together willy-nilly.  A guaranteed shortcut 
to "junk science."
[2] Bach may have written some compositions for a harpsichord,
others for clavichord.  Does the statistical analysis take
this possibility into account?  Do scholars know for *certain* 
which compositions were written for which instrument?   Did
Bach (or his patron, the prince) use different tunings on
different keyboard instruments?  Are we *sure*?  Are
scholars *sure* that many of Bach's compositions weren't
written to be played on *both* a harpsichord *and* a
clavichord (whichever might have presented itself and
been available) and might thus have represented Bach's attempt
to compose music which sounded good *regardless* of the
particular tuning used?
For example, the clavichord might have used one well temperament,
the harpsichord another--or the clavichord might have used, say,
Kirnberger III, while the harpischord might have used equal
temperament because harpsichord continuo often had to
accompany an instrumental ensemble at Cothen. (Remember,
Bach's harpsichord concerti were written at Cothen.)
Did the statistical analysis take these issues into account?
If not, why not?
[3] Many assumptions are inevitably implicit in any linear
parametric statistical analysis.  In order to calculate r values,
you have to fix parameters and make guesstimates about their
influence and constancy.   If you correlate verbal IQ test scores
with length of stay in the US for new immigrants and assume
strong causality, you come to the bizarre conclusion that 
emigrating to the United States raises people's 
intelligence.  
You get this garbage answer out of linear parametric statistics
because you put garbage *into* the equations: namely, garbage
assumptions.  Without basis, you assumed two parameters to 
be deeply causally connected for the wrong reason, and ran too
far ahead of yourself with the results.
This raises questions about the Bach statistical study.  Questions
of *both* causation *and* correlation. What are the *specific* r values
by interval category for Bach's compositions?  Do they imply
causation?  If so, what *kind* of causation? For a classic
example of garbage science, see the r values buried in the appendix
of Charles Murray's "The Bell Curve."  You'll find r values between
0.4 and 0.6.  As a rule, an r below about 0.75-0.8 is a sure-fire
indicator of smoke & mirrors. The correlation is so weak that the
researcher had better answer some *very* tough questions or
risk being called slipshod, or worse, a fraud.
So I for one want to know those r values on the Bach statistics.  
Did the Bach statistical analysis use linear regression?  
Quadratic?  Cubic?  Least-squares?
What's the mean, median and the standard deviations for the r values
of each interval broken down by year of composition?  What do these
profiles tell us about causation?  Was multiple regression used on
*different variables*?  Were the results compared?  What did *that*
say about causation as opposed to correlation or 
even mere coincidence (AKA low r values)?  Did the
statistical analysis even bother to consider such issues?
If not, I want to know why.  Bach may in some compositions have
been interested in exploring unusual dissonances: thus at certain
points in his career his compositions might have *deliberately*
used "bad" intervals in a given well temperament (if indeed he used
a well temperament).  But at other times in his career, he might 
have been more interested in exploring unusually perfect consonances
in a given well temperament.  This would change the intervals
Bach tended to use over time: did the statistical analysis take
this into account?
We know for a fact that Bach's 7th chords were considered wildly
dissonant and highly outre in his day.  Therefore it seems  
reasonable to posit that he might have systematically explored
sets of intervals unusual for composers of the period.  Did the
statistical analysis take this into account?  Or did the statistical
analysis arbitrarily assume that Bach would have used the most
consonant (read: beatless) intervals in a given well temperament
most often, and the least consonant intervals least often?
More complexly, Bach (being the genius he was) might have switched
his interests constantly, exploring one set of unusual dissonances in
one composition, another set of exotic consonances (available only
in a given well temperament) in another composition.  Conflating
all of the interval data into a single linear regression would destroy
all of this information and produce *wildly* misleading answers.
In this case, multivariate analysis would be called for.  Was it
applied?  Was multidimensional statistical analysis used?  Did
the researcher test for correlation between (say) timbre *and*
interval and interval, or only twixt interval and interval?
[4] Bach might have preferred certain intervals (even if he used
equal temperament) for numerological or ecclesiastical reasons.
We know with surety that he considered C minor and D minor "special"
keys.  Only a few of his compositions use these keys: they are
statistically underrepresented.  Bach clearly invested these keys
with some special significance, because he reserved these keys
for his most ambitious works.  The Chaconne (of which Bach wrote
exactly ONE), for instance, uses d minor: so does the famous prelude
and fugue.  The passacaglia & fugue (again Bach wrote only ONE
passacaglia) uses c minor...and so on.
Does the statistical analysis take this into account?  Depending
on the well temperament (if such a tuning was indeed used),
d minor and c minor might well have exhibited special intervallic
properties.  We can be reasonably certain from statistical analysis,
for example, that a number of Buxtehude's later compositions use
keys which when transposed down on the meantone Luneborg organ offer
unusually consonant sets of intervals.
Did the person who performed the statistical analysis take this
possibility into account? Did s/he run a separate analysis on
this assumption?  Were the results compared with the straightforward
statistical analysis?  
If not, why not?
Bach could have had many reasons for using certain intervals.
We know, for example, that Bach was numerologically inclined.
In one of his chorales the melody enters 10 times, representing
the 10 commandments: other examples abound.  Does the statistical
analysis of Bach's use of intervals take into account the possibility
that he might well have used a given interval-set for reasons *other*
than considerations of acoustic consonance and dissonance?
This same objection applies to fugue subjects and counter-subjects.
One fugue of the 48 deliberately uses all 12 tones of the chromatic
scale in succession, for instance: does the statistical analysis
take into account the effects of such part-writing?
[5] Some of Bach's klavier compositions were originally written
for organ, some are alterations or emendations of works written
for instrumental ensemble, and some are greatly modified versions
of other composer's works--specifically, the "transcriptions" of
pieces by Vivaldi, which are very much more than mere
transcriptions.   Does the statistical analysis take this into account?
If not, why not?
---
Statistical arguments for or against this or that historical trend
fill me with foreboding. They're a fertile breeding ground for "junk
science" (without the researcher *intending* to do junk science, of
course--or even realizing it).  So many assumptions and 
presuppositions are implicit in any linear parametric statistical 
analysis of historical data as almost to force me to proclaim:
 "a pox on all historical statistical studies!"
Classic examples of "junk science" from statistics abound
 in economics. For instance, those bogus United States GNP 
charts going back to 1876--charts which completely ignore the fact
that the U.S. switched from an agrarian economy in the early 19th
century to a steam-driven Bessemer-furnace economy in the late 19th 
century to an oil-and-steel-driven machine-tool economy in
the early 20th century to an information-driven service 
economy in the late 20th century.  What's the net discounted dollar
value of a bushel of tobacco in 1876 compared to the net discounted
dollar value of a megabyte of computer code in 1996?  The
question is unanswerable.  You're not just comparing apples
and oranges, you're comparing apples and *mu-mesons.*  The
question doesn't even make *sense.*
Again, sociological historical studies purporting to show 
improvements in "quality of life" as the century progressed
are equally flawed.  While in 1880 there were no antibiotics,
it was also standard for a middle-class family to have 2 or 3
live-in servants.  If you're a healthy person, would you be
willing to trade lack of antibiotics for being waited on hand
and foot and having your meals cooked for you and your washing
done by a crew of servants?  Would this be an overall improvement
or decline in your standard of living, as opposed to today?
The answer isn't obvious to me.  Again, apples compared
with oranges.  Again, garbage science produced by a misuse of
statistics.
All told, the value of historical statistical studies of Bach's
interval-usage seems at best right on the borderline of
junk science, and at worst little more use than 
examining bird entrails.
---
This leaves us with the written historical record.
Does any specific numerical record exist of the frequencies
to which Bach tuned each of the keys on his harpsichord?
Clearly not.
Thus we are left with inadequate data.  *Grossly* inadequate
data.  Regardless of what tuning you think Bach used, the
fact remains that (unless we want to swim in the VERY
murky waters of statistical historical numerology) we must
fall back on vaguely-worded hearsay testimony about Bach's
tuning.
My standard for this kind of historical hearsay is: would you
convict someone of murder on the basis of this stuff?
In this case, no way.  You don't need O.J.'s Dream Team
on this one.  The testimony is so weak and so open to
interpretation that even a grand jury would no-bill the 
defendant.  It wouldn't even get to trial.
Thus my sense here (reading the "Bach wars" posts) is again 
that the question is undecidable on the basis of the hearsay
testimony from Bach's relatives and acquaintances. 
Many of the quotes supposedly come from "eyewitness"
accounts--but can we be *sure* it was *actually* 
an eyewitness account, or was Forkel remembering
long after the event?  Or did Forkel miss the incident
entirely, and perhaps have to rely on C.P.E. Bach's 
recollection?  Or was it one of those "a friend of my
cousin's brother told me he heard someone say..." things, 
gussied up in first-person narrative form?
What's that?
Did someone mention "false memory syndrom"...?  Meaning:
people tend *not* to remember the event itself, but what
someone else *told* them about it...?
We know *some* generalities with reasonable certainty:
Bach was considered "old-fashioned" during his lifetime,
and his style was out of date long before he reached middle
age.   The  homophonic, racier, faster-paced "Italian
style" was much more in vogue by the 1720s than Bach's
almost quattrocentric polyphony.
Did this influence what friends and acquaintances 
remembered about Bach's tuning?  Did they unconsciously
exaggerate the "meantone" quality of Bach's music because
of the old-fashioned nature of his polyphony?  Or did they
instead unconsciously redact their memories of his tuning 
procedures so as to "modernize" Bach and unwittingly
make his music more fashionable to fit in with the new 
music everyone was used to?
I don't know the answer to these questions.  Before making
up my mind about "what tuning did Bach use?"  I'd sure like
to.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Sun, 5 Nov 1995 04:39 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id SAA29690; Sat, 4 Nov 1995 18:39:15 -0800
Date: Sat, 4 Nov 1995 18:39:15 -0800
Message-Id: <951105023715_71670.2576_HHB54-5@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu