source file: mills2.txt
Date: Thu, 19 Oct 1995 09:37:24 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & psychoacoustics - post 24 of 25
---
Juan Roederer is one of the more influential psychoacoustic researchers.  
Like many others in the field, he is biased toward a particular model of
the ear.Roederer is strongly biased toward the periodicity theory of hearing.
In "Introduction to Physics and Psychophysics of Music," the section on the
 physical makeup of the ear/brain system shows this bias clearly.
In this section there is a great deal of discussion of neurons and 
neural firing pattern, none at all on the processing of medullar and higher 
brain areas nor any detailed discussion of von Bekesy's experiments, the 
physical action of the organ of Corti, etc.  However to his credit Roederer 
does cite extensively the results of Ward, Corso, Terhardt, Sundberg and 
Lindqvist for the universal preference of stretched invtervals.  
Thus Roederer, like Helmholtz, is a contradictory figure--deliberately 
overemphaszing some of the evidence, while remaining open-minded about 
other contradictory results. Fetis (1943), Ellis (1885) Corso (1954), Ward 
(1970),  Burns (1970), Hood (1975) and Erickson (1983) are all strongly 
biased toward the ear-as-controlled-by-learned-preference model of 
hearing.  Terhardt and Ward/Burns tend to bury evidence which does not 
favor their view by dumping a superflux of additional results on top of the 
relevant data; this has the same effect as squirelling the relevant data 
away in a bibliograhy at the back of the article, but it achieves the same 
end by opposite means. Fetis, Hood, Ellis, tend to stress the  multiplicity of 
results and musical cultures, rather than concentrating on empirical data 
from specific experiments.
Von Bekesy demonstrates a bias toward the place theory but his bias does 
not appear to affect his willingness to bring forward contradictory results. 
In particular, he cites both the periodicity and place theories as worthy of 
additional investigation in his 1966 article "Hearing Theories and Complex 
Sounds," Journal of the Acoustic Society of America. 
Terhardt & Zick, Kameoka & Kuriyaga, Pierce, Mathews, Green, Wessel, 
Risset  and Sundberg do not exhibit a bias toward any specific theory of 
hearing.  These authors all cite competing hypotheses and suggest lines of 
further experimental inquiry into all 3 ear/brain models.
Throughout this article the intent has been to present psychoacoustics 
data as clearly as possible.
In many cases this meant extracting experimental results from layers of 
refutation or from citations buried in bibliographies because this or that 
psychoacoustician preferred not to bring the inconventient result out into 
the body of the text, where it might raise embarassing questions.
In other cases, viz., Risset or von Bekesy or Pierce, extensive direct quotes 
of secondary sources were used because these sources offered the most 
detailed survey of the evidence.
Thus the casual reader must be wary of Roederer, Helmholtz, Plomp and 
other sources widely cited because of the covert (sometimes overt) bias 
toward this or that tuning or theory or hearing.
As mentioned at the outset, acousticians have fared far worse than 
psychoacoustics researchers in this regard.  
Backus (1969), like von Bekesy, is biased toward just intonation--but 
unlike von Bekesy he neglects to mention any of the psychoacoustic experiments
 which cast doubt on either just intonation as the ideal tuning
system or the place theory as the sole explanation of hearing.  In the 
chapter ""Intervals, Scales, Tuning, and Temperament," Backus lavishes 3 
pages on just intonation and 2 pages on Pythagorean intonation but only 1 
page on equal temperament. No tunings are mentioned  other than
Pythagorean, meantone, just intonation and equal temperament: there is, 
for example, no reference to pelog, slendro, the Indian srutis, or any other 
non-European tuning..
Moreover, Backus buries or is not aware of many psychoucstic data which 
contradict his view of the ear as simple Fourier analyzer.  In part (as 
mentioned earlier) this is because Backus had the bad luck to publish his 
book "The Science of Musical Acoustics" just before computers introduced 
an immense unpheaval into acoustic and auditory research. In part the 
problem appears to be overt prejudice against acoustic results which do 
not favor just intonation.  As mentioned earlier, texts by Rossing and Hall 
supersede the acoustics in Backus and the psychoacoustics  (where Backus 
refers to them at all) are incorrect as well as out of date. Thus Backus' 
entire text should be ignored.
Benade (1975) cannot excuse his lapses on the basis of bad timing. In the 
period 1970-1974 much of the data cited throughout this series of posts 
was already well known; Benade chooses not only to ignore it, but actually 
to argue with a number of independently-confirmed results, particularly the 
universal preference for stretched musical intervals and the accumulated 
evidence for the periodicity theory.   
For example: "Experiments by Paul Boomsliter and Warren Creel give us very 
important information on what a musician actually does about tuning.  My 
discussion in this capter is strongly influenced by these data, although I do 
not completely accept their published interpretatiojn.  Paul C. Boomsliter 
and Warren Creel, "The Long Pattern Hypothesis in harmony and hearing," J. 
Mus. Theory, Vol. 5, No. 2, 1961, pp. 2-30, and Paul C. Boomsliter and Warren 
Creel, "Extended Reference: An Unrecognized Dynamic in Melody," J. Mus. 
Theory, vol. 7, No. 2, 1963: pp. 2-22. " [Benade, A., "Fundamentals of Musical 
Acoustics, 1975, pg. 303]
In short, Benade agrees with Boomsliter and Creel's claim for "small-
integer-ratio" detectors in the ear, but rejects the evidence they provide 
for the periodicity theory of hearing.   Benade's commentary is notable 
because [1] it is hidden away in a  footnote and [2] it ignores the fact that 
a wealth of additional evidence supports the periodicity theory of hearing--
evidence which cannot be easily explained by the place theory, which Benade 
espouses.
Again: "Everywhere in our experiments we have found indications that our 
nervous system processes complex sounds coming to it by seeking out 
whetever subsets of almost harmonically related components it can find." 
[Benade, A., "Fundamentals of Musical Acoustics," 1975, pg. 68]
This statement is as deceptive as it is true.  The accuracy of Benade's claim 
depends on experiments he chooses to perform: and by failing to perform 
auditory experiments which would cast doubt on the place theory of hearing, 
Benade creates the impression that no such doubt exists.  As has been seen 
throughout this article, there is ample evidence both to support and 
contradict the place theory of hearing (and to support and contradict the 
other two models of hearing as well). By omitting mention of any of this 
additional evidence, Benade creates a profoundly misleading impression in 
the unwary reader.  The implication of Benade's statement is that all 
psychoacoustic experiments support the place theory of hearing--entirely 
untrue, as we have seen.
Again: "The situation with tones having harmonic partials is much more 
straightforward.  We have already learned that pitch-matchings between 
usccessive and superposed tones are in agreement the tones consist of a 
few strong partials." [Benade, A., "Fundamentals of Musical Acoustics," 
1975, pg. 302]
The psychoacoustic data do not support this claim.  On the contrary: every 
psychoacoustic experiment since the 1830s shows a distinct and 
measurable difference betwen intervals heard as "perfect" when played 
successively and when played simultaneously, with a strong tendency for 
successive tones to be played wider than simultaneous tones, and a 
consistent tendency for both categories of tones to be played wider than 
small-integer ratios.  Clearly in this case Benade is unware of (or has 
chosen to ignore) 150 years of  psychouacoustic data.
For these reasons Benade's text is unreliable insofar as it bears on 
psychoacoustics.  Some of Benade's acoustic results remain valid, others 
have been disproven--particularly Benade's discussion of oscillation 
patterns in woodwinds and his theory of regimes of oscillation for brass 
instruments.  On balance the entire text should be ignored in favor of more 
detailed and far more accurate treatments by Rossing, Fletcher, Askill and 
Lord Rayleigh.
Rossing and Fletcher's "The Physics of Musical Instruments," and Askill's 
"The Physics of Musical Sound" remain excellent surveys of the state of the 
art in musical acoustics.  As mentioned, however, little information on 
psychoacoustics can be gleaned from these texts because psychoacoustics 
is not their concern.  These texts do not cite appreciable amounts of 
psychoacoustic data and should not be quoted to support this or that tuning 
or theory of hearing.
"Musical Acoustics: An Introduction," by Donald Hall, 1980, contains an 
accurate precis of acoustics of piano strings, metallohpohnes and 
woodwinds, as well as good survey of brass instruments, et alii. Hall is 
strongly biased toward just intonation and he buries or calls into question 
psychoacoustic data which do not accord with his prejudices. The acoustic 
portion of Hall's text is impeccable and worth reading, while the section of 
the book which bears on tuning systems and psychoacoustics is incomplete, 
outdated, full of errors of omission, and should be ignored.
The single best overall survey of psychoacoustic experiments peformed up 
to the 1960s is Plomp's 1966 text "Experiments In the Tone Sensation." It 
contains an exhaustive bibliography unmatched anywhere else, and 
constantly uses extensive direct quotes from the original sources.  Plomp 
exhibits a constant and strong bias toward the periodicity theory; however, 
he readily admits his prejudice.
He is also conscientious in pointing out behaviours of the human ear which 
are not well explained.
Georg von Bekesy is biased toward the place theory; not surprising, 
inasmuch as his work put the place (Fourier) theory of hearing on a firm 
foundation. He cites both the periodicity and place theories as deserving 
further study, however,  and (like Plomp) also cites results which 
contradict all three  models of the ear/brain system.  
"Experiments in Hearing," New York: Robert E. Krieger, 1960 and republished 
in 1980, is the single best source of references for the place theory of 
hearing. 
Harvey Fletcher's "Speech and Hearing in Communication," 1953, is dated 
but unlike Backus and Benade it is not rendered worthless by overt bias.
Better texts now exist (Sundberg, Rossing, Pierce, Terhardt & Zick) but the
 results Fletcher cites tend to be accurate.
Diana Deutsch's 1982 "The Psychology of Music"  summarizes key  
psychoacoustic results by many of reserachers who made the original 
findings.   Most of the  contributors are biased toward one or another tuning 
and the reader must take care to separate experimental results from the 
conclusions drawn by the various authors.  As has been seen, the 
conclusions of various researchers are on occasion mere opinions, 
unsupported by the facts.  The data cited in Deutsch's compilation are 
extensive and accurate, although the bibliogpraphies for each section prove 
distinctly selective.
"Psychological Acoustics," edited by E.D. Herbert, is a collection of the 
original papers in psychocoustics from the 1870s to the 1970s. This is the 
only text which amasses all the original results in the original authors' 
own words.  Much of the material is now dated, however, and therefore 
provides an incomplete picture of the ear/brain system.
"Auditory Scene Analysis," by Albert S. Bregman, 1990, is a disappointment. 
It is vague on crucial points and does not cite enough psychoacoustic 
references.  While Bregman does not exhibit major biases toward any 
specific tuning system, he appears to gloss over many difficult areas of 
psychoacoustics; viz., the contradictory evidence for various theories of 
hearing, unexplained ear/brain phenomena, the role of musical illusions in 
the auditory path, etc. 
On the whole Bregman's text is useful as a quick overview but should not be 
cited as a primary source.
The next and last post of this series will discuss the higher-level 
ineraction of tuning, timbre and structural tonality as considered by
Rothenberg, Keislar, Douthett and as examined in the work of Pierce, 
Risset, Sethares, Carlos, et al.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Thu, 19 Oct 1995 19:38 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id KAA07308; Thu, 19 Oct 1995 10:37:43 -0700
Date: Thu, 19 Oct 1995 10:37:43 -0700
Message-Id: <009981E2B053B9DF.5D10@ezh.nl>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu