source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sun, 29 Oct 1995 01:04:04 -0800

Subject: Re: Denver MICROSTOCK

From: Johnny Reinhard <reinhard@styx.ios.com>

Allow me to make a report on Neil Haverstick's unqualified success in 
Colorado.  It seems as if the entire state was participating, including 
printed press, radio (NPR and a local), university, classical musicians, 
citizens...

The audience was warm, full, and comfortable enough to enjoy a 3 hour 
program.  On a personal level I enjoyed premiering *Miles High* which 
allows me to create a trumpet sound on the bassoon by removing the reed 
and buzzing my lips on the bocal while breathing in.  Presto changeo, the 
bassoon is a "trumpetoon" and the jazz played with cellist David Eggar 
and bassist Guy Tyler made for progressive jazz.  

Guy premired his own *Three on the Floor* which comes out of his rock 
band Texas Firewimmen and is in fast quartertones with an improv section 
based on glissandi.  (All pieces were graciously received by this 
audience, regardless how new.)

Mayumi presented 3 works - all using Harmonic-13 just intonation and 
skirted all stylistic categories, other than thorough-composed.  Through 
the klezmer-sounding *Knishtet* quartet, the inward *Bassie* trio 
(remarkably akin to Eric Dolfy's *Eclipse* we realize since purchasing 
the CD in Denver), and *Peach* with its instrumental viruosity: all was 
clear and described as "heartfelt" by an NPR reviewer.  

My solo *Dune* opened our set the way it was meant too.  (A bassoonist in 
the audience told me afterwards that I did 80 things on the bassoon that 
she had never imagined possible.  And I intoned Harry Partch's *A Dream* 
complementing John Schneider's *Barstow*.

It was a complete joy seeing and hearing John Schneider perform on his 
multiple fingerboards.  His solo *Barstow* was corporeal in the most 
exciting way (notable was his turning around to look at the cross of the 
church intoning "Jesus was God in the flesh."  The Lou Harrison work was 
scintilating and people hung on every consonance.  John's own 
composition, which he re-arranged in just intonation "in order to 
liberate it from 12-ET" was more "sturm und drang" than any of the other 
works on his 45 minute set, refreshingly so.  Special thanks to John's 
care about the acoustics of the sound space regarding curtains, 
placement, grandfather clocks, amplification, etc.  

But leader of the team was Neil Haverstick who set the stage for a 
grand event.  His band with John Starrett (perhaps the grandfather of the 
Denver microtonal movement since he made the first 19-tone guitars and 
gave one to Neil) is a solid bassist with the mathematical and 
construction know-how to guide those interested in idiosyncratic 
microtonal pursuits, and drummer Ernie Crews (who came to my master class 
at UC at Boulder instructing microtonal bassoon to the bassoonists of the 
President of the International Double Reed Society class, and who has 
been a Partch disciple in study), is dynamite!  New works by Neil in 
34-tone ET and variety to the 19-tone Blues basis of the ensemble, and 
word has it that Neil is soon to be playing fretless in just intonation 
tunings... Check out his recording THE GATE, only you won't get to hear 
his new fast-picking country tune.

Neil has captured the imagination of the Denver/Boulder region which is 
growing economically and microtonally.  Somehow it seems amazing that 
there has been no comparable concert in California.  Talking with Jon 
Catler, he thought I should spell out on this forum that the AFMM 
Ensemble can present music in a myriad of styles on the highest level 
(e.g. Partch and pioneers, imrov, original works, requested works, and 
rock throught the Microtones Band).

John Schneider just represented American in Japan playing Partch and with 
Walter Mondale addressing it in the program!  Couldn't we drum up enough 
activity in the USA to have concerts of the sort just witnessed in 
Denver?  A little money and grass roots organization, combined with a 
clear artistic aim could bring St. Louis, Boston, Chicago, Gainesville, 
and other cities into a time when microtonal music is the music of the 
next millennium, but it's going on right now - in real time!

Johnny Reinhard
Director
American Festival of Microtonal Music
318 East 70th Street, Suite 5FW
New York, New York  10021  USA
(212)517-3550/fax (212) 517-5495
reinhard@ios.com


Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Mon, 30 Oct 1995 02:35 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id IAA14253; Sun, 29 Oct 1995 08:35:42 -0800
Date: Sun, 29 Oct 1995 08:35:42 -0800
Message-Id:  <9510291635.aa29720@cyber.cyber.net>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu