source file: mills2.txt
Date: Fri, 20 Oct 1995 07:57:41 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & psychoacoustics - post 25 of 25
---
As an empirical science, psychoacoustics is largely concerned with 
measuring the reactions of the ear/brain system to specific acoustic 
stimuli. However, human hearing is a hierarchical process made up of many 
layers of abstraction.  
Small acoustic stimuli shade imperceptibly into larger ones, leading 
inexorably to such large-scale percepts as "key center," "cadence," and
 "discordance" and "concordance." As Eberhard Zwicker points 
out, "It is clear that psychoacoustics plays an important role in musical 
acoustics.  There are many basic aspects of musical sounds that are 
correlated with the sensations already discussed in psycoacoustics.  
Examples may be different pitch qualities of pure tones and complex sounds, 
perception of duration, loudness and partially-masked loudness, sharpness 
as a an aspect of timbre, perception of sound impulses as events within the 
temporal patterns leading to rhythm, roughness, and the equivalence of 
sensational intervals.  For this reason it can be stated that most of this 
book's contents are also of interest in musical acoustics. At this point we 
can concentrate on two aspects that have not been discussed so far: musical 
consonance and the Gestalt principle." [Zwicker, E. and H. Fastl, 
Psychoacoustics: Facts and Models, 1990, pg. 312]
Zwicker characterizes the hierarchical perception of musical tones by 
drawing a distinction between sensory consonance (perceived roughness, 
sharpness, and noisiness of the tone) and harmony, (perceived tonal 
affinity, tolerability, and root relationship of tones or sequences of tones 
to a scale).  
So doing, he posits that both modes of perception are hierarchically involved
 in the sensation of musical consonance.
Both experience and experiment tell us that the process of listening to 
music involves levels of neural organization above the purely physical 
acoustic operation of the inner ear.  While the point of maximal stimulation 
on the basilar membrane indicates a simple mechanical Fourier analysis of 
sounds entering the ear, the firing pattern of neural fibers in the auditory 
nerve encodes pitch and spectral information in the nerve system in a 
complex way.
The path between primary auditory nerve and cerebral cortex is not a simple 
one.  Many feedback loops control the processing of auditory information, 
and there are many opportunities for higher brain centers to alter the raw 
input travelling up the auditory nerve--and vice versa.
The anatomy of the pathway between the auditiory nerve and   the cerebral 
cortex is complex: the cells of the primary neurons (that is, those in the 
auditory nerve) are located within the modiolus of the cochlea; these 
primary nurons terminate in the cochlear nucleus, a mass of gray matter 
located in the dorsal and lateral portion of the medulla oblongata. Here the 
physical nerve connection breaks. From this point there is a synpatic 
connection (mediated by neurotransmitters) to the neurons of the inferior 
colliculus.  After another synpatic gap in the neural pathway, the third-
order neurons converge on the medial geniculate body, the final relay station
 on the auditory path to the cerebral cortex. It's worth nothing that the 
medial geniculate body not only collates fibers from the audtiory nerve, but 
also from other sensory systems and from the cerebral cortex as well. Thus 
the geniculate body serves not as a passive relay station so much as an 
active filtering and integrating locus.
>From the geniculate body, the fourth-order auditory neurons connect with 
the cerebral conrtex by way of a thin sheet of radiating nerve fibers.  These 
radiations include corticofugal fibers running from the cortex back to the 
medial geniculate body.
Thus the auditory neural pathway contains a complex feedback loop, 
controlled by several sets of higher brain loci, running between the auditory 
nerve and the cerebral cortex.  
Most of the fourth-order neurons enter a small region ofthe posterial half 
of the horizontal wall of the Sylvian fissure, which acts as a focal zone for 
the entire auditory cortex. The complexity of the auditory region of the 
Sylvian fissure is daunting: each cochlear fiber makes connections with 
thousands of other neurons grouped in at least thirteen regions, and 
populated by many different types of neurons. To make the process even 
more complex, not all of these neurons respond identically. Some produce 
strong signals when presented with tones in a 
particular frequency range but do not respond to tones in other frequency 
ranges. A small fraction of neurons emit strong signals when two different 
frequencies are sounded together, but these same neurons produce little or 
no response when either frequency sounds alone. Some neurons are most 
strongly stimulated by sounds at specific amplitudes: sounds outside this 
narrow amplitude window cause no resopnse from suchneurons. For yet other
 auditory nerve fibers, the higher the sound's amplitude, the stronger the 
response, until a satuation point is reached. Some neurons respond best toe 
amplitude-moedulated tones, others to frequency-modulated tones. Some 
neurons respond with paritcular vehemence to sounds coming from a 
particular region of space, and some neurons respond best to sounds that 
are moving in space.
Because these cortical loci consist of neural pathways, they are formed by 
learned response and can be changed.  Thus, the impact of culture and 
experience on musical perception is at least as great as the physical 
sensory correlates of musical tone--if not greater.
"I once attended...a concert in Bangkok that was totally mystifying. I could 
see that the audience was utterly enraptured, swooning at moments of 
apparently overwhelming emotional beauty that made no impression on me 
whatsoever; not only that, I couldn't distinguish them from any other 
moments in the piece." [Eno, Brian, "Resonant Complexity," Whole Earth 
Review, May 1995, pg. 42]
This points to a important caveat.  While the results adduced so far provide 
evidence for this or that musical tuning system ont he basis of sensory 
consonance, psychoacoustics cannot describe or validate the higher levels 
of musical organization implicit in a tuning system.
Thus the internal structure of a tuning is different from the sensory 
consonance produced by intervals within that tuning.  For example: Risset's, 
Pierce's and Sethares' timbral mapping procedure, following the 
implications of research by Plomp and Levelt and Kameoka and Kuriyagawa, 
allow a composer to control the level of *sensory consonance * in a given 
tuning, but mapping the component partials of a sound into a given 
maximally consonant set for a specific scale does *not * change the 
inherent tonality of the scale, its Rothenberg propriety, the Barlow 
harmonicity or the Wilson efficiency of the scale.
In short, by changing timbre, note duration, and compositional style one can 
change the surface affect of music produced in a given tuning: but the 
deeper structural elements of the tuning remain invariant. 
Ivor Darreg described one of the deeper structural invariants in a given 
tuning as its "mood:" "In my opinion, the striking and characteristic moods 
of many tuning-systems will become the most powerful and compelling 
reason for exploring beyond 12-tone equal temperament. It is necessary to 
have more than one non-twelve-tone system before these moods can be 
heard and their significance appreciated." [Darreg, Ivor, "Xenharmonic 
Bulletin No. 5, 1975, pg. 1]
David Rothenberg proposed that the Rothenberg propriety of a scale 
explains some aspects of the scale's deep structure; Clouth and Douthett 
duplicated some of this work in their article "On Well-Formed Scales."  
John Chalmers has speculated that Rothenberg propriety explains the sense 
of tension in such tunings as Ptolemy's intense diatonic.
In addition to the "mood" or overall "sound" of a given tuning, Darreg and 
McLaren (1991) pointed out that each tuning exhibits some degree of 
inherent bias toward melody or harmony.  The Pythagorean intonation and 
13-tone equal temperament, for example, are both strongly biased toward 
melody, while 31-tone equal temperament and 13-limit just intonation are 
strongly biased toward harmony.
Douglas Keislar made this same point in his 1992 doctoral thesis.  In it, 
Keislar describes research which demonstrates that altering the surface 
characteristics of the music--timbre, tempo, spatialization--does not 
change the deeper structural characteristics of the tuning. Thus, while 
mapped overtones will make a comopsition in 13-tone equal temperament 
sound more acoustically smooth, it does not change the essentially atonal 
character of the 13-tone scale, nor does it materially affect the scale 
"mood." Similarly, changing the timbres of a composition in Ptolemy's 
intense diatonic tuning will alter the degree of sensory roughness or 
smoothness; adding reverberation will mask to greater or lesser degree 
some of the overall "sound" of the composition.  But the sense of aesthetic 
tension created by scale intervals which are, in Rothenberg's usage, 
improper, will remain unchanged.
Thus the implications for tuning suggested by psychoacoustic research 
must be viewed as separate from larger musical and perceptual questions. 
Because current psychoacoustic experiments focus on questions of sensory 
perception, there remains a dichotomy between what Easley Blackwood has 
called "concordance and discordance" and sensory consonance and 
dissonance. In fact sensory consonance is a misnomer: the effects are more 
accurately described as sensations of auditory roughness or smoothness.
Depending on the tuning or the composition, intervals which are perceived 
as rough may prove concordant, while intervals which prdouce the auditory 
sensation of smoothness may strike the listener as discordant--that is, out 
of place musically.  In Western music, the best example of this phenomenon 
is the perfect fourth, which sounds acoutically smoother than the major 
third but which by itself generally constitutes an unstable and  musically 
discordant interval.
In Balinese and Javanese music, the best example is the stretched 1215-
cent octave, which sounds acoustically rough but which produces as sense 
of musical concordance when performed by a gamelan.
The most striking example in my own experience was a 1990 concert by 
the Women's National Chorus of Bulgaria. One of the duets (a folk song 
from the Thracian plains) ended on a large major just second (9/8).  The 
Western audience sat without moving forwhat seemed a long time: only 
when the  singers bowed did the audience realize the duet was over, and 
 applaud.  In  this case the contradiction between learned perceptions of 
concordance and cadence, and the sensory perception of roughness in the 
cadential intervals, prevented the audience from correctly perceiving the 
cadence. 
It is important not to confuse sensory roughness or smoothness, as 
measured by psychoacoustical experiments, with higher-level perceptions 
of musical consonance and dissonance. Many advocates of just intonation 
have baselessly conflated the two categories, while advocates of Fetis' 
model (viz., all auditory responses are predominately learned responses) 
excessively emphasize the abstract levels of hierarchical auditory 
perception while unjustifiably discounting the purely physical processes at 
work in the human ear/brain system--in particular the frequency-analysis 
operations of the basilar membrane and the periodicity-extraction 
mechanism of the neurons in the auditory nerve. 
Ultimately, what Zwicker calls Gestalt musical perception is mediated not 
only by the physics and acoustics of the inner ear, but also by primary, 
secondary, third-order and fourth-order neurons, a variety of different 
brain locations, and the operant conditioning imposed by experience, culture 
and  musical tradition.  The conclusions of this series of posts must be 
taken in that context, and understood in that larger framework.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Sat, 21 Oct 1995 01:16 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id QAA08509; Fri, 20 Oct 1995 16:16:08 -0700
Date: Fri, 20 Oct 1995 16:16:08 -0700
Message-Id: <Pine.3.89.9510201934.A16496-0100000@email.ir.miami.edu>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu