source file: m1482.txt
Date: Thu, 23 Jul 1998 11:36:33 -0400

Subject: Re: TUNING digest 1481

From: Dr_Orient <jma9183@garnet.acns.fsu.edu>

>  <Nangaku@aol.com> wrote:
>
> Can somebody in this forum help me understand the concepts of overtones and
> tone color?  For example, A440 produced by a tuning fork consists of
> vibrations having frequencies of mostly A440. But A440 played on a piano or a
> tuba will have more overtones, frequencies that are multiples of 440  - 880,
> 1320 etc.  This is were I lose it. Are overtones different frequencies
> produced by different aspects of whatever materials are producing the sound?
> So if the sound is being created by simpler materials such as a tuning fork,
> the will be fewer other frequencies involved, whereas if the sound is created
> by a piano, the hammer and string are more complex materials and therefore
> have more frequencies or overtones?

You're on the right track. The simplest acoustic timbre (to my knowledge) is that
of the flute, which approaches a pure sine wave (fundamental). A vibrating
string, on the other hand, vibrates along its entire length (1/1, the fundamental
pitch), half its length (1/2, giving the octave), a third of its length (1/3, an
octave and a fifth), a fourth (1/4, two octaves), and so on (Pythagoras had some
very nice discussions on this subject). Different string materials, means of
excitation (such as a bow or the hammers of a piano), tension, and other factors
(such as the presence or absence of a mute on a viola, or bray pins on a harp,
for example) influence how loud (roughly speaking, how great the amplitude) any
given overtone will be in relation to the others. It is the balance or proportion
of loudnesses of all the individual overtones that determines the timbre of a
sound, whatever the source or medium of that sound might be  it might be a
vibrating string, a column of air, a speaker set in motion by an electronic
signal, etc.    Incidentally, it is because the ratios of vibration of overtones
get progressively more complex the higher up the overtone series one goes that we
have the eternal invention of different systems of tuning and their resultant
aesthetic and scientific debates (like many that are found in this very digest!).
Some of the more theoretically learned contributors can clarify these points
better than I (I'm certain I detected a more than a few cringes at my
over-simplifications), but hopefully this can begin to help.
All The Best,
Dr_Orient