source file: mills2.txt


Subject: Post from McLaren

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

From: mclaren
Subject: Paul Erlich's innovative & insightful ideas in Digest 749
--
In Tuning Digest 749, Paul Erlich pointed out that
"A typical way of evaluating equal temperaments is to 
measure the smallest possible tuning deviation of several 
just intervals of interest. The problem with this approach 
is that it does not guarantee that the approximating
intervals are consistent with one another." -- Paul Erlich
This is an excellent point, and it's not clear that anyone
else has made it so cogently.  In fact this could serve
as the basis of a fascinating article, were any of the
12-TET-obsessed music theory journals interested in
publishing such an article. (You never know.  Sometimes
they relent.)  
The earliest reference to an idea similar to this one 
appears to be found in Mersenne's Harmonicorum Libri... 
(1636), pp. 126-127 (last pagination of 2nd ed., 1648).
Mersenne defines each interval as equal to a certain
number of commas, and some of the commas are 
incompatible with one another.  
This is in the same ballpark as, but clearly not identical
to,  Erlich's insight.
--
Gary Morrison's conceptual difficulties in working with
multiple simultaneous tunings are probably what
Ivor Darreg used to call a "pseudo-problem."  In other
words, something that conceptually seems like
an unimaginably difficult issue but which, in real
life, turns out to be largely irrelevant or trivial.
(Playing 19-TET or 22-TET on a 7-white-5-black
keyboard is such a "pseudo-problem." In both cases,
the answer is to use open-voiced chord with third
and root played by the left hand, fifth by the right
hand.  Simple.  Trivial.  What's the problem?)
In combining 12-TET and 19-TET, for instance,
we in the Southern California Microtonal Group
have found it useful to view 19-TET as a gapped
nondiatonic  scale with some very xenharmonic
ornamental tones.
As I've pointed out before (and as Paul Erlich's
experiments with his roomate demonstrate), listeners
hear the whole-tone portion of a 19-TET diatonic
scale as very reasonable and familiar-sounding, but
the 2/19 of on octave "semitones" (a misnomer, since
this term presupposes that whole tones are 
divided into 2 parts whereas in 19-TET they are
divided into 3 parts)  always make folks squirm.
They sound...weird. "Out-of-tune" is the typical
description.
The solution, in my experience, is to fracture the
mislabelled "semitone" intervals in the 19-TET
approximation of the 12-TET diatonic scale into
1/19s of a tone.  Thus a typical melody in 19-TET
will proceed by whole steps which sound very
reaonable in combination with 12-TET.  Then
a constellation of 1/19-octave steps are used
to bridge the gap twixt the next "island" of
whole steps in the 19-TET approximation of
the diatonic scale.
This seems to work reasonably well *provided*
that 12-TET semitones and 19-TET 1/19s of
an octave don't play simultaneously.  If, instead,
these intervals "trade off" between different
players (the way good jazz players will trade
off playing flatted blues thirds), the 12 + 19
combo seems to work well.
Another trick that seems to work is to play
melodies full of familiar 12-like intervals
in 19-TET, but to go above or below the last
note of the melody by 1/19 of an octave.
This works well, by the way, for many 
incommensurable ETs: 15 and 12, 14 & 17,
15 & 17, 19 & 22, etc.
Many ETs are, however, commensurable--
that is, one forms a subset of the other,
or both form gapped subsets of a much
higher division of the octave.
When combining 5-TET and 7-TET, for
instance, it is often useful to throw
in 35-TET chromatic passages.  This
emphasizes that the tiny intervals
heard between 5-TET and 7-TET pitches
that happen to occur vertically are not 
accidental, but part of the coherent
35-TET scale.
The issue of combining non-just non-
equal-tempered scales with xen ETs,
or combining, say, all 3 different 
classes of tuning simultaneously,
is more complex.  I'm still feeling
my way along in this regard. 
--mclaren