source file: mills2.txt
Date: Mon, 2 Dec 1996 08:29:42 -0800

Subject: From McLaren

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

From: mclaren
Subject: 1/1
--
A forum subscriber recently described the
irregular publication schedule of 1/1, the
journal of the Just Intonation Network,
as "mail fraud."
People, this is SYMPTOMATIC of the kind
of laziness and ingratitude that characterizes
all too many members of this tuning forum.
The fact that David Doty has kept the journal
1/1 going is a testament to his fortitude and
perseverence.
This is an heroic act.  1/1 is essentially a 
one-person operation and there is *nothing*
harder in the world than continuing to do
what you *know* must be done even though
everyone else has abandoned hi/r support.
Instead of criticizing David Doty, you
people ought to be down on your knees
thanking him for continuing to do a thankless
job with no pay and no praise and no help.
Instead of thinking up ways to verbally attack
him, you ought to be thinking of superlatives
with which to praise him.  
How many of *YOU* would have the guts and
the perseverence to continue with such a
thankless job?  How many of *YOU* would
continue to bust your humps editing and
mailing and soliciting subscriptions for
and coordinating lists of just intonation
concerts and publications for a magazine
whose subscribers couldn't even bother
to get off their butts and submit an 
adequate number of articles?
And if you don't like 1/1's irregular
publication schedule, how about this?
Why don't you forum subscribers get up off
your fat lazy asses and *help* David Doty
put the magazine out?
How about that?
Would *that* ever occur to any of you?
How about taking your finger out (as the 
British say) and bestirring yourself to get
up from in front of your computer screen
and actually walk out the door and help
the man put out the *only* remaining
journal of microtonality that appears
at anything like a regular schedule?
You know,  criticizing Doty and then sitting
back on your fat lazy butts and doodling
around  with your computers is utterly
*typical* of the lethargic do-nothing 
clowns who make up the vast majority
of the membership of this tuning forum,
and I'm sick of it.
You never bother to actually read any of
the texts I cite, okay.  Fine.  I expect
that.  It's typical, no surprise. You can't
bestir yourselves to tune up and listen
to any of the harmonies or melodies I
cite, no problem.  I expect it. That's par for
the course.  It would take some effort.
But subscribing to 1/1 would take next
to zero effort.  Getting up of your grotendous
butts and writing an article for 1/1
would take very little effort.  If you
live anywhere near the Bay Area, 
driving to Palo Alto and asking what 
you can do to help Doty put the 
magazine out would take slight
effort, but nowhere near as much as
struggling with a MIDI synth and
a computer and a recalcitrant piece
of software to try and get a synth
tuned to the 37th root of 31, say,
or the free-free metal bar scale.
--
If you people want 1/1 to be published
on a regular basis, how about putting
your money and your brains and your
effort where your mouths are?
How about it, people?
Don't you realize that without support,
organizations like the Just Intonation
Network fade away?  
Haven't you figured that out yet?
Aren't you getting it?   If an organization
isn't growing, it's dying.  
How about cutting down on your time-
wasting WWW usage and stop ogling
that website where the coffee pot boils
in real time?  How about using the three
or four bucks a month you'd save that
way to subscribe to 1/1?
Or, God forbid, how about making an even
larger donation that $25 a year to the
JIN?  How about that?  Maybe you could
even cut back your time-wasting
monthly hours of web-surfing by, oh,
even as much as 10 or 15 hours a month
and spending the money you save on
the JIN?
How about it, people?
You know,  the spectacle of a group of
rich white lazy nerds sneering and 
jeering at and criticizing a heroic
microtonal pioneer like David Doty
is bad enough...  But to make matters
worse, watching you people sitting 
around surfing the web compulsively so you
can download the complete inventory
of tunings you'll never use from some
remote website instead of spending your 
time and effort helping to support one
of the few remaining microtonal
organizations dedicated to pushing
forward the frontiers of new music...
Well, the spectacle makes me want
to puke.
Folks, sometimes you remind me of
Da Vinci's description of the do-nothing
Florentines who couldn't be bothered to
build or finance his inventions but who
could *ALWAYS* spend the time and
effort to criticize him:  Da Vinci
called such people "passages for food."
--mclaren 
	

Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Mon, 2 Dec 1996 23:21 +0100
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA27462; Mon, 2 Dec 1996 23:23:23 +0100
Received: from eartha.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA27493
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <manuel.op.de.coul@ezh.nl> id OAA15044; Mon, 2 Dec 1996 14:23:20 -0800
Date: Mon, 2 Dec 1996 14:23:20 -0800
Message-Id: <199612022221.OAA14994@eartha.mills.edu>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu