source file: m1476.txt
Date: Wed, 15 Jul 1998 08:56:09 -0700 (PDT)

Subject: Another from Hill

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

Forwarded from Dave Hill (ascend11@aol.com) by John Chalmers

Second post: Listening Surveys EQT vs MT piano, etc.


	In listening tests which I have given to both high school summer
music
campers and entering undergraduate music students - several hundred
individuals in total - I have found that preferences between EQT and 1/4 MT
versions of simple pieces of music run (with much variation) about 30% MT,
40%
EQT, and 30% equal preference.  Some express very strong opinions in favor
of
MT, some express very strong opinions in favor of EQT, and some indicate
that
they find very little difference in sound between the differently tuned
versions.  The majority of those whom I've tested have felt that the
difference which the tuning system makes to the sound of a performance is
appreciable.  Many have expressed surprise, even astonishment, that a
factor
such as tuning system could make such a difference to the sound of music
performed on a piano.  I have found indications of consistently different
percentage breakdowns for different subgroups among those whom I^Rve
tested.
Among some subgroups, majorities preferred some MT versions.

	I suspect that the 30 MT, 40 EQT, 30 equal preference breakdown is
specific to the group I've tested and that different breakdowns would be
found for different populations.  Also, most of those whom I^Rve tested had
never heard music performed on a piano in 1/4 MT temperament before, or in
anything other than EQT.  I believe that with increased exposure, greater
percentages, I
believe well over 50%, would prefer the sound of 1/4 MT music for
arrangements
which could be performed in that tuning.

	I believe that despite all uncertainties, it is safe to say that
surprisingly wide differences between individuals with respect to their
reactions to the sound of piano music in 1/4 MT will be found.  I think
most of us find the idea that something which sounds pleasing and
harmonious to us sounds unpleasant and distorted to someone next to us
hearing the same thing to be disturbing and counterintuitive.  Still, these
differences keep turning up in many different situations.

	I once tested a total of about 30 individuals with contrasting
phrases,
one in an artificial tuning half way between EQT and JI and the other in an
artificial tuning quote OVERTEMPERED unquote 50% beyond EQT.  In this case,
80% of those tested preferred the tuning half way between EQT and JI, 10%
indicated equal preference, and 10% indicated preference for the
overtempered
versions.  Many said that the overtempered phrases sounded really
irritating -
made them angry.  The balance for EQT vs the novel 1/4 MT was much more
even.