source file: mills3.txt


Subject:  trolls on the forum

From:  stick@dnvr.uswest.net

Haverstick here...there's been a few comments about my recent posts, so I
thought I could explain myself. First, I do not have the time or
inclination to simply make posts to piss folks off...if I say it, I
definitely feel it. I do not make "veiled references"...I see no point in
mentioning the names of folks whose music I don't care for, because it is
NOT a personal issue with me. A person's character is not dependent on
their musical abilities...and yes, Beardsley, I DO have lofty standards,
and I don't see that as a bad thing. I expect a lot out of folks, and
that means me first. I have worked hard for many years to play my axe,
and I continue to do so. Thus, if I hear someone doodling instead of
playing, I am gonna call it straight. And, unfortunately, there IS a lot
of noodling and doodling in the microtonal field...(truth be told,
there's a lot of crappy 12eq music too, so it ain't just the
microdoodlists who suck); so, I say practice, and get better...nothing
wrong with that, either. Constructive criticism is OK by me, and I
constantly solicit it for myself, as well...I still take guitar lessons
when I need to. Life is full of non musical lessons, as well, and there
seems to be no end to these.
Also, I love theory...I have many theories about many things too,
including tunings. I think Erv Wilson is a great genius, and I don't care
if he plays or not...same with the late Larry Hanson. Yes, I would like
to see more theories of tunings translated into great music; again,
what's wrong with that? Perhaps my method of delivery occasionally rubs
some folks the wrong way...OK, no problem, I do talk blunt. But, again, I
do NOT attack out of spite, or ego. It's all for the art of music, and I
do my best to keep the personal junk out of it. It is risky second
guessing someone's intentions from a computer screen, however; Sorry, Mr.
B, but you were wrong about everything you guessed about me. Often, when
a person assigns incorrect motives to another, they are seeing that
person through their own personal traits and perhaps that is what
Beardsley did here...it's pretty common...Hstick



$AdditionalHeaders:  Received: from ns.ezh.nl by notesrv2.ezh.nl (Lotus SMTP MTA v1.1 (385.6 5-6-1997)) with SMTP id C12564DB.00280E07; Mon, 21 Jul 1997 09:17:30 +0200