source file: mills2.txt
Date: Tue, 3 Oct 1995 08:22:15 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & psychoacoustics - post 10 of 25
---
So far we have seen the complexity of the ear's response to pitch; not a 
quantity linearly proportional to the logarithm of frequency, pitch appears 
to be influenced by many aspects of timbre--amplitude, masking tones, 
overtone harmonicity, and range of the note played.  
The ear's perception of complex sounds is equally complicated.
"Both von Helmholtz and Wundt based the development of harmony and 
melody on the coinciding harmonics for consonant intervals." [Plomp, R. and 
Levelt, W.J.M., "Tonal Consonance and Critical Bandwidth," Journ. Acoust. 
Soc. Am., Vol. 6, No.1, April 1965, pg. 549]
Simple experiments, conducted in the 1960s, showed this not to be the case.
"On the basis of more recent and more sophisticated experiments (Plomp and 
Levelt, 1965) on consonance judgment involving pairs of pure tones and 
inharmonic complex tones, it became apparent that the beats between 
harmonics may not be the major detemrining factor in the perception of 
consonance. Two pure tones an octave or less apart were presented to a 
number of musically naive (untrained) subjects who were supposed to give a 
qualification as to the "consonance" or "pleasantness" of the superposition. 
A *continuous pattern* was obtained, that did not reveal preferences for 
any partuclar musical interval. Whenever pure tones are less than about a 
minor third apart, they were judged "dissonant" (except for the unison); 
intervals equal orlarger than minor third were judged as more or less 
consonant, irrespective of the actual frequency ratios.  The shape of the 
curve really depends on the absolute frequency of the fixed tone." [Roederer, 
J., "The Physics and Psychophysics of Music," 1973, Pg. 142] 
Plomp and Levelt called this interval, somewhat smaller than a minor third, 
"the critical bandwidth."  It changes size slightly at lower frequencies.  
"...maximal tonal dissonance is produced by intervals subtending 25% of the 
critical bandwidth, and maximal tonal consonance is reached for interval 
width of 100% of the critical bandwidth." [Plomp, R. and Levelt, W.J.M., 
"Tonal Consonance and Critical Bandwidth," Journ. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 6, 
No.1, April 1965, pg. 549]
"An interesting consequence of the significance of the critical bandwidth is 
that the degree of dissonance of a dyad depends on many factors other than 
the frequency ratio.  If the tones have many strong overtones, the 
consonance quality is reduced.  A consonant dyad becomes increasingly 
dissoannt when it is transposed downward on the frequency scale, just as 
for sine tones. For example, a major third sounds reasonably consonant 
around A4, but if played close to C2 it sounds quite dissonant on most 
instruments.  The relation between consonance and frequency ratios is also 
entirely dependent on whether the tones have harmonic spectra.
"Consonance is apparently a highly conditioned phenomenon. It is stimulating 
to realize that the dissonance/consonance concept in music theory would 
have been entire different if our musical instruments had not provided us 
with harmonic spectra!" [Sundberg, J., "The Science of Musical Sounds,"1992, 
pg. 85]
This finding lends support to all three tunings (just, equal tempered, non-
just non-equal) provided that the partials of the musical notes are changed 
so as to fit the tuning.
As mentioned above, Plomp's and Levelt's findings (extended and refined by 
Kameoka and Kuriyagawa's formula for calculating the consonance of 
complex tones) also casts doubt on many conventional "rules" of harmony 
and melody--even if just intervals and perfectly harmonic overtones are 
used: "As an application of the consonance theory, effects of harmonic 
structure on the consonance characterisc are discussed. (...) 
(...) It became clear that the fifth was not always a consonant interval.  A 
chord of two tones that consists of only odd harmonics, for example, shows 
muchworse cosnonance at the fifth (2:3) than at the major sixth (3:5) or 
some other frequency ratios.  This was proved true  by psychological 
experiments carried out in another institute (sensory Inspection Committe 
in the Japan Union of Scientists and Engineers) with a different method of 
scaling. Thus, the fact warns against making a mistake in applying the 
conventional theory of harmony to synthetic musical tones that can take 
variety in the harmonic structure." [Kameoka, A., and Kurigawa, M., 
"Consonance Theory Part II: Consonance of Complex Tones and Its 
Calculation Method," Journ. Aoucst. Soc. Am., Vol. 45, No. 6, 1969, pg. 1460]
Because consonance and dissonance depend not on the harmonicity of two 
complex tones, but on the coincidence (or lack thereof) of their component 
partials within the critical bandwidth for that frequency range, "...these 
examples refer to a vast domain opened up by digital synthesis, namely that 
of inharmonic tones.  Most sustained instrumental tones are equasi-
periodic, and their frequency components are harmonically related, which 
stresses certain intervals like the octave and the fifth.  With the freedom of 
constructing tones from arbtirary frequency components, one can break the 
relationship between consonance-dissonance aspects and fixed, privileged 
intervals (Pierce 1966). In his piece Stria (1977), Chowning has thus been 
able to make rich textures permeate each other without dissonance or 
roughness, by controlling the frequencies constituting these textures. This 
is also a case where spectra not only play a coloristic role (see Roads 1985) 
but actually peform a quasi-harmonic function." [Risset, J.C., "Digital 
Techniques and Sound Structure in Music," in "The Music Machine," ed. Curtis 
Roads, 1985, pg. 122]
"By using a digital computer, musical tones with an arbitrary distribution of 
partials can be generated.  Experience shows that, in accord with Plomp's 
and Levelt's experiments with pairs of sinusoidal tones, when no two 
successive partials are too close toegher such tones are consonant rather 
than dissonant, even though the partials are harmonics of the fundamental.  
For such tones, the conditions for consnance of two tones will not in general 
be the traditional ratios of the frequencies of the fundamentals. (...)  It 
appears that, by providing music with tones that have accurately specified 
but nonharmonic partial structures, the digital computer can release music 
from the tyranny of 12 tones without throwing consonance overbarod." 
[Pierce, J.R., Journ. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 6, No. 12, 1966, pg. 249]
"I suggest that the nonharmonic domain of frequency relationships may in 
some way contain a necessary system of hierarchical structural functions."  
[Dashow, J.,  "Spectra As Chords," Computer Music Journal, 1980]" 
"The hypothesis has been made that perceived  effects similar to the 
consonance and dissonance experienced with harmonic tones  should exist 
for inharmonic tones. Clearly, it cannot be claimed that the perceptions are 
exactly the same, since inharmonic and harmonic tones themselves sound 
different to the ear. However, the experiments do establish a similarity 
between the consonance dissonance phenomenon in harmonic and inharmonic 
sounds." [Geary, J.M., "Consonance and Dissonance of Pairs of Inharmonic 
Tones,"  J.Acoust. Soc. Am, 67 (5), May 1980]
"The chords sounded smooth and nondissonant but strange and somewhat 
eerie. The effect was so different from the tempered scale that there was 
no tendency to judge in-tuneness or out-of-tuneness. It seemed like a peek 
into a new and unfamiliar  musical world, in which none of the old rules 
applied, and the new ones, if any, were yet undiscovered." [Slaymaker, F. H, 
"Chords From Tones Having Stretched Partials," J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 47, pp. 1469-1471, 1970]
"We have to compose real music of many kinds within all and any of our new 
tuning schemes, if this work is to have any lasting value at all, or be taken 
seriously by the music community..."[Carlos, W., "Tuning: At the Crossroads," 
Computer Music Journal, 1987] 
In short, "Experiments with inharmonic partials (Slaymaker, 1970; Pierce, 
1966) have shown that consonance or dissonace is indeed dependent on the 
coincidence of partials and not necessarily on the simple frequency ratio 
between the fundamnetal frequencies..." [Rasch, R.A. and Plomp, R., "The 
Perception of Musical Tones," in "The Psychology of Music," ed. Diana 
Deutsch, 1982, pg. 21]. Thus all three tuning systems appear equally viable 
on the basis of the evidence considered in this post, given a digital or acoustic instrument whose partials are matched to the  tuning system 
in question.
The next post will discuss the important phenomenon of categorical
perception, and its implications for tuning and music.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Tue, 3 Oct 1995 19:30 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id KAA04880; Tue, 3 Oct 1995 10:30:18 -0700
Date: Tue, 3 Oct 1995 10:30:18 -0700
Message-Id: <m0t0B81-000FwjC@frollo.fa.disney.com>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu