source file: m1527.txt
Date: Fri, 11 Sep 1998 22:06:18 -0400

Subject: DLB at Columbia U.

From: David Beardsley <xouoxno@virtulink.com>

Pauline Oliveros Foundation Presents

D E E P L I S T E N I N G B A N D

DECADE: TEN YEARS OF SONIC EXPLORATION

SUSPENDED MUSIC, A Collaborative Project
Of The Deep Listening Band And
Long String Instrument Band, To Feature
100 FOOT-LONG STRING INSTRUMENT

Premiere Works By PAULINE OLIVEROS, ELLEN FULLMAN, and PAUL D. MILLER

Produced by Lauren Amazeen


LOW LIBRARY ROTUNDA, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY
SEPTEMBER 24 - 26 - 8:00 P.M.
- FREE -

The Deep Listening Band (DLB) - Pauline Oliveros,
Stuart Dempster, David Gamper - have created and
performed some of the most original sonic
explorations of the past ten tears in site-specific
acoustic environments from a cavernous cistern in
Washington state to a lava cave in the Canary
Islands. This September, DLB kicks off a season-long
Decade celebration. Set in the vaulted marble arena
of the McKim, Mead & White-designed Low Library at
Columbia University, Suspended Music will feature
the Long String Instrument (LSI) - a one-of-a-kind
musical instrument with strings nearly 100 feet
long stretching across the public space of the site.
Suspended Music will feature the New York premiere of
Epigraphs in the Time of AIDS, by Pauline Oliveros,
and TexasTravelTexture by Ellen Fullman, creator of
LSI. These works are featured on the new recording
Suspended Music, recently released by Periplum.
The DLB performance will also feature the newest
incarnation of the Expanded Instrument System (EIS),
a unique, computer-driven musical machine that
is a part of the ongoing sonic evolutions of the
Pauline Oliveros Foundation. Following each of the
three formal concert presentations, Paul D. Miller
will create a special, informal sound environment,
reimagining DLB compositions in a new work: Speak
Spoke Spoken/Break Broke Broken: Depth Charge on
the Deep Listening Zone - Deep Listening Band Decade
Remix. Paul D. Miller's performance will include a
special duet with Pauline Oliveros, and an
informal lounge will be open in an adjoining space.
Suspended Music will take place September 24 - 26
at 8pm in the Low Library Rotunda, Columbia University,
Broadway at 116th Street. Admission is free. Further
information can be obtained by calling (212)334-0237.

The Expanded Instrument System (EIS) is an evolving
electronic sound processing environment dedicated to
providing improvising musicians control over various
parameters of electronic transformation of their
acoustic performances. Performers each have their own
setup which includes their delay and ambiance
processors, microphones, signal routing and
mixing, and a computer which translates and displays
control information from foot pedals and switches.
In addition, they have access to shared processing
resources, such as a special digital signal processing
computer. The musicians and their instruments are the
sources of all the sounds, which they pick up by their
microphones and subject to several kinds of pitch,
time and spatial ambiance transformations and manipulations.
No electronic sounds sources are used, only acoustic
instruments and voices. Software for the EIS was developed
by David Gamper with additional software by Panaiotis
of PanDigital Corporation and by Rick Stone.

The Long String Instrument, a part of the EIS project,
was created by composer Ellen Fullman. Architect Gabriella
Gutierrez is collaborating on the EIS installation
at Low Library.LSI is a hundred foot-long original
instrument. The performers walk among groups of strings,
bowing them with rosined fingers. The instrument produces
a unique almost orchestral sound, based on the natural
overtones of the strings. The physical scale of the
instrument and the way the overtones interact with
the space turn the site into a giant musical instrument.
The LSI Band is made up of Ellen Fullman, Amy Denio,
and Matthew Sperry.

DLB (Pauline Oliveros-accordion, Stuart Dempster-trombone,
David Gamper-winds and electronics) was formed in 1988,
while recording its award winning Deep Listening CD for
New Albion Records in a two million gallon cistern with
a reverberation time of 45 seconds. DLB has continued to
explore unusual acoustic spaces such as caverns, quarries
and nuclear cooling towers. Several DLB Decade
performances are planned for the 1998-99 season in
New York.

Original document @ http://www.artswire.org/pof/DLBlowPR.html

--
* D a v i d        B e a r d s l e y
*           xouoxno@virtulink.com
*
* J u x t a p o s i t i o n     E z i n e
* M E L A  v i r t u a l  d r e a m house monitor
*
* http://www.virtulink.com/immp/lookhere.htm