source file: m1361.txt
Date: Sat, 21 Mar 1998 17:45:22 EST

Subject: we mean well......

From: A440A <A440A@aol.com>

Bob asks:
<<What's the difference between "Well" and "Meantone"?  I think I understand
>>Meantone now, but I keep seeing references to Well.  It's 12-tone, right?

     Yes, Well temperament generally refers to the 12 note division of the
octave.  
Meantone tuning, ( which got its name long after it was no longer used, I
think),  display little key color, as most of the usable keys are tuned alike,
with the last 1/3 of the combinations absorbing all of the comma.  Keys are
really harmonious or really bad.
    Well temperament, on the other hand, spread the comma out far enough to
make even the worst keys acceptable to the 17th and 18th century ears.  The
elegance of a well temperament was judged by how even a tonal palette
resulted, and the difference of tempering in the thirds provided what I have
labeled a "Harmonic Toolbox" for the composers of the era.  They would select
a key for particular harmonic character to fit their composition. 
     There were quite a few meantone tunings that spread the comma beyond the
first four fifths:  there was 1/5 comma, 1/6, etc.,  all of which gradually
tempered more and more of the intervals.  If I had to make a hard edge
distinction, I would say that a well temperament provided a variety of
tempering in the root tonic thirds, in a progression demonstrated by
modulating by fourths or fifths, with no third tempered by more than a
syntonic comma.  The more accidentals, the more dissonance in the thirds.  The
Young,(1799) has the F#-C# third at 21.5 cents, but that is the limit.  Some
of the earlier well temperaments had several thirds that were tempered this
much, but no more.  
     The well temperaments were, of course, hijacked by those that touted the
'doctrine of affections", or the "Character of the Keys", etc.  These
philosophies had their origin in Plato and his buddies idea of "Ethos", and
through the ages, whatever was current was fair game for "proof".  
     I have written a long piece for all of this, which can be found at 
http://www.airtime.co.uk/forte/history/edfoote.html
   If you want to hear well temperament on a modern Steinway, email me off
list for an address, and I can send you ordering info.  

Regards, 
Ed Foote 
Precision Piano Works
Nashville, Tn.