source file: mills2.txt
Date: Tue, 25 Feb 1997 23:51:41 -0800

Subject: Re: History of the Diatonic Scale - Aristoxenus and Ptolemy

From: kollos@cavehill.dnet.co.uk (Jonathan Walker)

Manuel Op de Coul wrote:

> If the Greeks had not their 
> absolutist Pythagorean/Platonic insistence on ratios in explaining 
> everything, to the extent that the discovery of irrational numbers was a 
> forbidden secret,would they not have progressed farther in mathematics and 
> science? In particular, would some mathematician not have interpreted 
> Aristoxenus' ideas in terms of the twelfth root of two? I'm sorry if it's 
> not politically correct to identify the intellectual stumbling blocks of
> past civilizations.

I thought this old chestnut concerning Aristoxenus had been laid to rest; 
clearly I was wrong. The adoption, in the 16th century of Aristoxenus as the 
father of equal temperament tells us much about the ideas of 16th century 
musici looking for antique sources to justify their intuitions about lute 
and viol tunings, but it says little or nothing of value regarding the ideas 
of Aristoxenus himself. In constructing his tetrachords, Aristoxenus accepts 
both the 4/3 as the boundary of the tetrachord, and the 9/8 as the tone of 
disjunction; if you doubt this, I suggest you read Aristoxenus, together 
with Barker's footnotes. Now this leads to a contradiction in the 
description of the various tetrachords: the diatonic, for instance consists 
of two tones and a semitone, but since he has already accepted the 9/8 tone, 
(9/8)^2 * sqrt(9/8) must equal 4/3, which they obviously do not. Don't take 
my word for this; if you're short of time, might I suggest one passage in 
particular: Elementa Harmonica, Book II, 56-7. Here Aristoxenus attempts to 
give a practical proof that two-and-a-half tones equals a fourth, with a 
proof that depends on tuning a fifth correctly; the fifth, however, must be 
flat by a Pythagorean comma in order to make the proof work. But Aristoxenus 
never indicates any such drastic flattening, nor does he even once, in the 
whole treatise, ever suggest tempering intervals. Trying to pick your way 
through this and other arithmetical contradictions can lead, I am convinced, 
to only one honest conclusion: that Aristoxenus should be understood as 
providing us with essentially vague, musicianly descriptions, which are 
distorted if we begin to squint too hard at the details, and try to endow 
them with more mathematical rigour than he ever countenanced -- this is the 
problem with later apologists from Cleonides to the 16th century. 
Aristoxenus himself implicitly encourages this attitude, when he states 
that, in the manner of his teacher Aristotle, music theory should be 
regarded as an autonomous discipline, relying on its own concepts rather 
than being subordinate to, say, acoustics or to the arithmetic of the 
rationals. I don't personally endorse this approach, but I don't think it's 
intellectually dishonourable; but twisting Aristoxenus in directions he 
never intended is a distinctly more dubious pastime.

If, for the sake of argument, we follow Aristotle and Aristoxenus in taking 
music theory as an autonomous discipline, then of course we will think in 
terms of adding or subtracting intervals, rather than multiplying or 
dividing ratios. Aristoxenus's diatonic tetrachord, with its two equal-sized 
tones, would appear to be nothing other than the standard Pythagorean 
diatonic (the "ditonic diatonic" in Ptolemy's list) -- the only difference 
being that Aristoxenus eschews the Pythagorean ratio description. In this 
case, we can argue our way from Pythagoras to Aristoxenus along the 
following path:

           9/8 * 9/8 * 256/243 4/3

           log(9/8) + log(9/8) + log(256/243) 4/3

           tone + tone + limma diatessaron (fourth)

and if we are to take Aristoxenus as a faithful reporter of contemporary 
musicians' thinking, the limma was taken to be half of a tone, so:

           tone + tone + semitone fourth.

But we must note that this was the informal thinking of people who are 
concerned with their art rather than with theoretical niceties; it was 
certainly not a matter of sophisticated mathematical reasoning far in 
advance of its time, involoving irrational quantities in the specification 
of the semitone, whether (9/8)^(1/2) or 2^(1/12); nor does Aristoxenus 
provide any such reasoning.

> I do agree that in most cases the diatonic scale existed without a
> standardized tuning. I believe that the creation of similar tetrachords 
> was the only guiding principle in most cases, since I do not believe that
> 5-limit or higher ratios are relevant to purely melodic music. The 3-limit
> (and even 2-limit) approximations have a wide range of tolerance when
> harmony is not an issue, or when inharmonic instruments make the value of
> just intonation questionable.

What is a 2-limit approximation of a diatonic scale. The "2-limit" gives us 
nothing but octaves. Or did you mean 2^1/x, in which case the "limit" 
terminology is out of place.
 
> What is "mystical" about Ptolemy is that he insisted on superparticular
> ratios and a geocentric universe with purely circular motions as if these
> were some sort of revealed truths. They ended up requiring exceedingly
> complicated models to approach the fairly simple realities. It is just as
> fair to criticize his views as it is to criticize Aristotelian physics.
> Where would the world be if no one had ever criticized Aristotelian
> physics? If a schoolteacher were to teach Aristotelian physics today, 
> would it not be fair to criticize them? 

Reading the first two books of Ptolemy's Harmonics certainly doesn't suggest 
a mystical approach to the description of Greek tuning practices; Ptolemy 
remains faithful to the approach he gives at the beginning: the testing of 
all reasoning by empirical means. The superparticulars 2/1 (which is also 
multiple) 3/2, 4/3 and 9/8 were not challenged by any Greek theorist; 
Ptolemy reasoned that all melodics (i.e. conjunct intervals in tetrachords) 
should similarly consist of superparticulars, on the assumption that an 
observed pattern should not be thrown aside at the first hint of 
uncertainty, but should be explored further to see if it will yield further 
results that stand up to empirical testing. We can carry out this project 
with greater rigour than Ptolemy, who could only rely upon his ears. But we 
see in various places that he certainly didn't treat the superparticular 
principle as a sacred truth: witness his readiness to grant that the intense 
diatonic tetrachord used in singing was approximated by the still more 
easily tunable ditonic diatonic, even though the latter involved a 
non-superparticular ration (namely the 256/243). (Another of Ptolemy's 
departures from any doctrinal presentation is the listing of the six tunings 
customarily used in his time by practising musicians: four of the six 
combine two different tetrachordal tunings.) 

> Matt, you could be given a Mozart string piece which would have to descend
> by, say, seven commas from beginning to end, if it is to have all chords 
> in just intonation and no comma shifts in sustained tones (this is 
> actually a typical scenario). Even though the beginning and ending keys 
> may be notated exactly, you would say that the piece ends in a distincly 
> different key than it began. Would your analysis reflect the musical 
> reality better than the traditional analysis? I think not! What if the
> piece was a keyboard piece?
> Forget it!

Leopold Mozart, being representative of a 17th/18th-century string playing 
tradition, specified 1/6th-comma meantone as the tuning which expert players 
should employ. His son, it seems, endorsed this (see the Chesnut article 
"Mozart's Teaching of Intonation" in JAMS, c.1980 -- sorry about the vague 
date), and with it the corollory of tuning flats higher than sharps that 
mean-tone tunings share with just intonation. Since string players are 
limited by the tuning of their open strings, they cannot incorporate any 
irreversable comma shifts (as opposed to some local fluctuation), but the 
use of any meantone tuning removes this problem, by means of their different 
characteristic compromises. As for a Mozart keyboard piece, equal 
temperament was in the process of supplanting well-tempered systems for 
keyboards in the German-speaking lands during Mozart's lifetime -- what of 
it. Just intonation of the type requiring comma shifts (i.e. prohibiting 
intervals such as 40/27) has two obvious home grounds: a capella singing, in 
which it can be employed intuitively, and in electro-acoustic music, where 
it can be applied by calculation. Any other application requires special 
efforts; Johnston string quartets, yes, but Mozart, no. 

-- 
Jonathan Walker
Queen's University Belfast
mailto:kollos@cavehill.dnet.co.uk
http://www.music.qub.ac.uk/~walker/

Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Wed, 26 Feb 1997 15:56 +0100
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA18649; Wed, 26 Feb 1997 15:56:33 +0100
Received: from ella.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA18675
Received: from  by ella.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	 id GAA29788; Wed, 26 Feb 1997 06:54:09 -0800
Date: Wed, 26 Feb 1997 06:54:09 -0800
Message-Id: <Pine.SOL.3.91.970226085326.27137D-100000@library>
Errors-To: madole@mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@ella.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@ella.mills.edu