source file: mills2.txt
Date: Fri, 3 Nov 1995 09:00:50 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

>From : mclaren
Subject: Larry Polansky & adaptive tuning
---
Long ago in a galaxy far away, Larry Polansky
wrote an article entitled "Paratactical tuning."
In it he posited a  system of dynamic tuning which
adaptively changes the size of interval classes
depending on musical context.
While in one sense this is a sophisticated
software method for facilitating modulation
in JI (similar to such arrangements as
Harold Waage's logic-gate just intonation system
which detected fingering patterns and retuned
intervals so as to produce maximally beatless
chords regardless of key)...in another sense
Larry was getting at something much deeper.
Paratactical tuning is far more than mere dynamic
retuning to produce the "best" chords according
to the location of the current 1/1.  Because Larry P.
leaves it pretty much open-ended as to what
the criteria are. They could be "which 1/1 are we
on?" but they could easily be something else.  Once
it's all in software, the rule-set that determines
how JI intervals shift can respond to a lot more than
local key center...for instance, the software could
respond to the player's dynamics, or the shape of
the melody line, or the nature of the harmonies
being played.  More: Larry suggests that the
criteria for the rule-set geoverning the adaptive
tuning might be open-ended as well--possibly even
dynamic.  
One could imagine, for instance, an adaptive 
tuning which morphs JI intervals from "plaintive"
to "luminous" or from "tense" to "resolute." (As
William Schottstaedt has so dextrously done
in an intuitive fashion in the fourth movement
of his composition "Water Music," albeit in
that case moving from 13-TET to Pythagorean.
If you haven't heard this composition, you're
missing a truly spectacular piece of music.)
As a first advance, this leads directly to
a systematization of Lou Harrison's "free style"
of composition, in which successive intervals
are tuned not with reference to a fixed 1/1, but
with respect to the previous note.  Clearly such a
practice produces a much more complex system of 
just tonality--but, as Boomsliter and Creel pointed 
out, this might also more closely mirror the way
the average person hears music.  Our hearing appears
to be relative rather than centered on an absolute
1/1 (except for those rare listeners with absolute
pitch), if the psychoacoustic evidence is to be
credited.
However, Larry's idea of adaptive tuning goes
much further than simply the B&C idea of the
"the long pattern hypothesis."   While useful,
B&C's concept of melodic sections moving between
separate and distinct 1/1s is in itself limiting
because it posits simplistic patterns of linear
movement twixt striaghtforward JI melodic
contours, overtone structures, etc.
When combined with the concept of morphological
metrics, Larry Polansky's paratactical (or adaptive) 
tuning really begins to open a *lot* of new doors. 
For instance, changing one morphological metric
into another introduces (on the level of the melodic
phrase) a complex set of requirements between
vertical and horizontal interval-relations.  As
Larry so insightfully realized, this is an ideal
case for adpative tuning: and with sufficiently
complex software, paratactical tuning does 
indeed seem the ideal solution to this ever-present
tension twixt vertical and horizontal relationships
in the context of changing from one vertical or
horizontal morph to another.
But when you throw in the concept of changing
from one *timbral* morphological metric to another
at the same time....!  Then, adaptive tuning--in
this case extended downward into the micro-level
of the individual overtone--is the *only* practical
solution to the complexities introduced.  Because
of the extraordinary explosion of interactions
between timbre, vertical and sequential structure
in tihs case, a set of adaptively tuned overtones
offers by far the simplest solution. (Jean-Claude
Risset and John Chowning and Bill Sethares and
James Dashow have produced some compositions
which use elements of this technique: the pieces
are astonishingly beautiful, yet only a preliminary
step toward the total integration of timbre with
harmony.  Because of the incredibly cumbersome nature 
of "doing it all by hand" in Csound, further advances
along this line seem likely to be made only with
the aid of some sort of automated morphological
metric software.) 
However, there's even more to Larry's idea than this.
At the highest level, adaptive tuning can be 
thought of a way to generate a single "composite"
instrument from a number of subinstruments. If
you think of each dynamically-retuned section 
of the score as a specific subinstrument, the real
depth of Larry's idea becomes clear.  In order to
wander over the entire solution space  you'd need
huge numbers of actual physical instruments--not
a reasonable solution.  Thus Larry substitutes *virtual*
instruments.   And adaptive tuning shows its true
power by effect switching betwen those virtual
instruments instantaneously: the net result is
infinitely more efficient & flexible than either the 
Partch solution of limiting the composition to a 
single key, or  the Harrison solution of requiring the
performer to be painstakingly exact in moving from one
just ratio to another as well as keep in hi/r head
where the melody has been and where it's going
to (in terms of moving 1/1s).
Larry has written a composition that puts some of
these ideas into practice.  Due to be premiered
in Japan, it looks to this old score-reader like  
another remarkably beautiful JI composition, yet
(as mentioned) it's more than that...  Larry's 
upcoming piece promises to significantly
advance the state of the microtonal art.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 3 Nov 1995 19:14 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id JAA00103; Fri, 3 Nov 1995 09:14:02 -0800
Date: Fri, 3 Nov 1995 09:14:02 -0800
Message-Id: <Pine.SUN.3.91.951103090144.11512C-100000@garcia.efn.org>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu