source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sat, 21 Oct 1995 17:04:40 -0700

Subject: McLaren & stretched intervals

From: bf250@freenet.carleton.ca (John Sankey)

Thanks, Brian McLaren, for a most impressive collection of 
well-annotated references. I suspect that, over the next few 
months, the NRC librarians will think I've never retired!

However, as I read your posts, you consider that the preference 
of musicians for stretched intervals shows a failure of 
psychoacoustic theory. I disagree.

"If music sounds dead, it isn't music" is a maxim that all 
musicians keep forefront in mind. We don't want our sounds to 
be dull=pure, so we deliberately skirt the edges of consonance 
at stases, and go beyond them at regular intervals to give our 
phrases shape. We are limited in our ability to do this with 
simultaneous intervals when we want a tonality to our sound, 
but even then can treat sequential intervals much more freely. 
Is not masking theory consistent with higher pitches sounding 
more prominent than lower, hence being preferable for this 
purpose? And, acceptable pitch change, not just consonance, is 
very dependent upon timbre and pitch as I hear it. The 
considerable variations in interval stretching that you cite 
may be more consistent than you believe.

I am certain that musical language speaks to very different 
parts of our brain than consonance and tonality do, and it 
seems to me that psychoacousticians knowingly focus on the 
latter because it is obvious that the former is so much an 
artefact of learned culture and less productive of 
scientifically-describable results. Such a focus is not a 
failure - "theories of everything" are illusions (or 
delusions) even in high-energy physics, and ludicrous in the 
context of the complexity of living things. After all, our 
ears evolved to aid us in the complex job of survival, not so 
we could enjoy music!

Musicians choose instruments, then audiences choose musicians. I 
consider the widespread assumption that trained musicians must 
be eliminated from psychoacoustic studies to be the opposite 
of the truth if results are to be applicable to real-life 
music. For example, musicians make bass sounds with far more 
harmonics in timbre than they select for treble sounds. I 
submit that a major reason for this is so that acceptable 
changes in pitch produce equivalent dissonance across the 
gamut of the instrument. Instruments that did not do this (and 
there are many) have been selected out of the repertoire by 
musicians' choice. This is a testable hypothesis (BTW, if this 
hasn't already been studied and anyone is interested in 
collaboration, email me) whereas the character of the desire 
for such dissonance is probably a much more elusive quantity. 
The preference of the musically naive for "boom boxes" stands 
in notable contrast. This might turn out to be solely because 
musicians concentrate on musical language more than on 
consonance - we do seem to keep very different areas of the 
brain active during listening than naive listeners.

And, when considering pitch in ensembles, don't forget the role 
of competition. Everyone wants their sound to stand out from 
others but still sound professional. The perennial jockeying 
for leading pitch in ensembles arises from very different 
brain centers than those studied by psychoacousticians!


--
John Sankey              bf250@freenet.carleton.ca
Music is Beauty, Beauty is Truth, Truth is Freedom

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Sun, 22 Oct 1995 16:43 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id HAA28370; Sun, 22 Oct 1995 07:42:36 -0700
Date: Sun, 22 Oct 1995 07:42:36 -0700
Message-Id:  <9510220741.aa05395@cyber.cyber.net>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu