source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sun, 21 Jan 1996 16:07:15 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: The adoration of the Cage-i (Round 2 of 15)
---
A recent recording session involved overdubs of
a cassette tape of harmonic series members 1-44
made 10 years ago by Jeff Stayton with megalyra 
solos recorded last week.
After hearing the resulting composite, Bill
Wesley offered some choice comments.
"That sounds like an interesting use of chance. As
opposed to John Cage's *stupid* use of chance."
"You mean the idea of flipping coins to choose notes?
What's stupid about that, Bill?"
"You get a bunch of random pitches.  White noise.
But the human ear is specifically adapted to detect
and filter out noise--because if you can't hear a
sabre-tooth tiger's roar through the noise of the 
jungle, you're dead.  So what did John Cage elevate
to highest status in his brain-dead musical theories?
Just what the human ear is best designed to
throw out...noise.  Another word for chance."
"But wait a minute, Bill.  Cage worshippers like to
point out that he didn't just pick notes at random--Cage
*constrained* the choice of notes and phrases.  In 
'Music of Changes,' for instance, he used coin flips 
to choose among constrained start-times and 
transpositions of a set of pre-composed phrases."
"It doesn't matter, Brian.  If you throw the aces
out of a card deck, that doesn't make the distribution
of cards any less random after you shuffle 'em."
"That's a good analogy.  I wonder why none of these
people seem to understand that?"
"Because the cult of personality tends to impair judgment.
In the end, no matter how you constrain it, noise is noise.  
Even if you narrow down the choice to two notes, it's
still random.  And you'll detect and be bored by that
randomness."
"I've noticed that, Bill."
"It's why, even if you alternate between only two
phrase start-times, your ear will hear the random
distribution and find it trivial."
"You make a good point there, Bill.  I have to admit
it certainly is easy to pick a conversation out of the
noise of a crowded room. And it certainly explains
why 'Music of Changes' sounds like complete  crap."
"Exactly.  Noise is noise, no matter how you constrain
it. The notion that there's anything interesting about
a random distribution is a stupid idea--pure and simple.
It's dumb.  But then, that's the whole point."
"Eh?"
"It's what always happens in a group of monkeys.  Whenever
some lesser monkey shows  imagination or initiative, the 
alpha males always crush him.  They've got to--to  maintain 
the status quo."
"I don't understand, Bill."
"The whole idea behind Cage's music is that he wasn't part
of a revolution at all.  He was part of a *suppression* on the
part of the aristocracy.  The rich people want to play golf
all day and swig martinis.  They don't want *anyone* to rock
the boat.  You start adding extra pitches to the octave, and who
knows what's next?  Everything could come unglued. So the 
artistocracy hire someone like Cage to crush people with 
*real* imagination and drive them out of music."
"People with imagination?  You mean...like, microtonalists?"
"Yep."
"Well...  Cage *did* call microtonality 'just another wing 
on the academy...'"
"Sure. The whole point of Cage's music was to take anyone
with enthusiasm and originality and horrify him to the
point where he gets out of the field and goes to work at
McDonald's."
"Isn't that kind of harsh, Bill?  After all, people like Warren
Burt are already accusing me of 'showing bad manners
freely, and displaying an appalling lack of gentleness and
generosity' to people like Cage.  God only knows what they'd
say if I repeated *your* comments on the tuning forum."
"Of course they accused you of showing 'bad manners.' Creativity 
is considered the *ultimate* in bad manners by the aristocracy.  
It's another way of maintaining the status quo."
"How's that, Bill?"
"You call imagination 'rude' and then hire people like Cage to
make sure that only cynical, empty people have any power
 in the field  of music.  All that talk about 'removing intention
from the music' and 'letting the music be itself' was nothing
but another way of making music students into a bunch of
monks who flagellate themselves on command."
"Flipping coins never did seem like much of a musical
revolution, I must admit...  But, gosh, Bill--this is pretty
blunt talk, isn't it?"
"That's a laugh!  These people bleat about 'gentleness
and generosity'--and the minute you suggest emperor Cage
has no clothes, they come after you with a bowie knife
and murder in their eye.  So much for 'gentleness.'  So
much for 'generosity.'"
"It *is* strange...  You'd think the microtonalists would stick
together, despite their minor differences."
"Well, remember what Harry Partch said in his program
notes to 'Water, Water':
'The creative man is not specialized by inclination, but
by the autocracy of modern education. (..) Ordinarily,
however, he is so closely intimidated by his specialty
that if he decides to make some slight deviation
from the norm, in some creative work, it will seem
like a 'revolution,' both to him and to others, and
he can easily become the progenitor of a 'new' 
movement.  But the deviation must be slight, because a
large deviation is not only incredible, it isn't even
recognizable.  In the end, it is just ridiculous.'"
"You mean a deviation like throwing out octave
equivalence, Bill?  Or pointing out that the 
psychoacoustic evidence doesn't support just 
intonation?"
"Exactamundo."
"Gee...when you put it that way, Bill, it *does* sound
as though Cage was just another toady."
"Right.  Another errand boy elevated by the musical 
aristocracy into a position of godhood to keep the 
*really* creative people from rocking the boat."
"Creative people?  Like Partch? Or Carrillo?"
"You got it."
"But if I ever dared to post something like *that* on the
tuning forum...ye gods. They'd go ballistic, Bill."
"Maybe.  But from what you've said, most of the academics 
on that tuning forum are too lazy even to write a letter.
So I don't think *I* have anything to worry about."
"Come to think of it, Bill, you're probably right."
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Mon, 22 Jan 1996 07:38 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id WAA10477; Sun, 21 Jan 1996 22:38:53 -0800
Date: Sun, 21 Jan 1996 22:38:53 -0800
Message-Id: <9601212325167216@csst.com>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu