source file: mills2.txt
Date: Thu, 5 Oct 1995 12:58:04 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & psychoacoustics - post 12 of 25
---
The psychoacoustic evidence for the periodicity and Fourier-analysis-based 
models of hearing has now been examined. 
But what about interaction between these two ear/brain systems?
Evidence for this comes from David Wessel's examination of a psychoacoustic effect known as "streaming" in the mid-70s: 
"Consider a melodic line of eleven tones where the even-numbered tones and 
the odd-numbered tones are separated in register. As shown...at a rate of 5 
or 6 tones per second, a listener would hear the sequence as a coherent 
succession.  At a faster tempo--10 to 12 tones per second--the high tones 
group together to form a separate stream from the low tones. At an 
odge, C., Jerse, T. "Computer Music: Synthesis, Composition and Performance," 1985, pg. 47]
Time is a crucial factor in pitch perception, implying further feedback 
between the periodicity and Fourier-analysis systems of pitch detection: 
"The data...show that the just-noticeable relative frequency difference 
increases with decreasing test-tone duration. (...) At long durations (around 
500 ms) a critical-band rate difference of 0.01 Bark represents the just-
noticeable difference for pitch.  At a duration  of 10 ms, the JNDF amounts 
on average to 0.2 Bark.  For a decrease of the test-tone duration by a factor 
of 10 ms, the magnitude of the JNDF, expressed in critical-band rate, 
increases by a factor of 10.  Thus pitch differences which are easily 
detected at logn durations are no longer distinguishable at short durations.  
This effect is well known to musicians: inaccuracies in intonation, easily 
detected in sustained tones, almost disappear if the tones are considerably 
shortened in duration, for example by playing `spiccato.'" [Zwicker, W. and H. 
Fastl, Psychoacoustics: Facts and Models, 1990, pg. 116]
Other results make it clear that the perception of pitch is dependent on the 
temporal order of tones:
"When presented witha group of spectral components, a listener may or may 
not fuse them into the percept of a single sound.  One of the determining 
factors is the "onset asynchrony" of the spectrum which refers to the 
difference in entrance times among the components. (...)  Rudolf Rasch has 
noticed a related phenomenon with regard to the synchronization of tones in 
chords in polyphonic music.  He has found that the amount of asynchrony in 
starting times of chord tones actually improves our ability to perceive the 
individual tones while we continue to perceive the chord as a whole. 
Rasch has shown that the effect obtains best when the attacks of the tones 
are spread out over a time span of 30 to 50 msec." [Dodge, C., and Jerse., T. 
"Computer Music:  Synthesis, Composition and Performance," 1985, pg. 59]
Because of this unexpected interdependence of time with freqeuncy 
perception, it seems likely that all 3 of the ear's mechanisms for processing 
sound interact to some degree. There is further evidence for this interaction 
between all 3 ear/brain systems in the form of auditory paradoxes:
"Paradoxical effects can be obtained thanks to the precision and flexibility 
inherent in computer synthesis.  Shepard produced a sequence of 12 tones in 
chromatic succession which seem to rise indefinitely in pitch when they are 
repeated.  I extended this  paradox and generated, e.g., ever-ascending or 
descending glissandi, and sounds going down the scale and at the same time 
getting shriller. These paradoxes are not merely "truquages"--artificial 
curiosities: they reflect the structure of our pitch judgments.  Pitch appears 
to comprise a focalized aspect, related to pitch class, and a distributed 
ascpect, related with spectrum, hence with timbre--and the paradoxes are 
obtained by controlling independently the physical counterpart of these
attributes, which are normally correlated. I have even manufactrured a 
sound which does down in pitch for most listeners when its frequencies are 
doubled--i.e., when one doubles the speed of the tape recorder on which it is 
played; this shows how misleading mere intuition can be in predicting the 
effect of simple transformations on unusual sounds." [Risset, J.C., "The 
development of Digital Techniques: A Turning Point for Electronic Music?"  
Rapports IRCAM No. 9, 1978, pg. 7]
These effects make clear the importance of context and the subtlety of 
interaction among the ear's various methods of sound processing. 
This would tend to militate against tuning theories which stress absolutes 
like beats or the convenience of easy modulation, and would support instead 
the use of non-just non-equal-tempered tunings whose context-driven 
character mirrors  this aspect of the ear/brain system.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 6 Oct 1995 07:40 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id WAA01139; Thu, 5 Oct 1995 22:40:25 -0700
Date: Thu, 5 Oct 1995 22:40:25 -0700
Message-Id: <951006053855_71670.2576_HHB33-5@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu