source file: mills2.txt
Date: Mon, 16 Oct 1995 08:42:42 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning and psychoacoustics - post 21 of 25
---
Throughout this series of posts, we have seen that the ear/brain system 
is not simple.
As is now clear, the behavior of the auditory system when presented 
with complex tones is different than that predicted by Ohm/Helmholtz: 
"Helmholtz's working hypothesis has  been put aside by later 
investigators, both those who worked in music and those who worked 
in psychoacoustics.  Several reasons for this can be given.  First, 
before the introduction of electroacoustic means of tone production 
and control in the 1920s, it was not possible to carry out the 
necessary psychoacuostical experiemnts, while Helmholtz's observations 
proved insufficient in many ways. Second, it turned out that musical 
theory has its own rules apart formm the perceptual relevance of the
 characteristics of the sounds it makes." [Rasch, R. A., and Plomp, R.,
 "The Perception of Musical Tones," in "The Psychology of Music," ed. 
Diana Deutsch, 1982, pg. 21]
But the behavior of the ear/brain system is also different from that 
predicted by Seebeck, Stumpf and Schouten: 
"It sounds obvious if we say that we hear a note a' if the fundamental 
of the frequency is 440 c.p.s. But what happens if we remove this 
fundamental by electrical means, leaving on ly the harmonics with 
frequencies of 880, 1320, 1760 cps, etc?  Or if we take away the 
fundamental 440 cps and the second harmonic 880 cps? 
We learn from experiments that the perceived pitch level remains the 
same: a'.  One may take away many of the lower harmonics without 
altering this.  If this `mutilated' note is interrupted for only an 
interval of a second, the sensation is completely altered. Instead of 
the `residual tone' on a' we now hear another pitch which lies 
approximately in the region of the strongest remaining harmonics and 
is called `formant pitch.'" [Werner Meyer-Eppler, "Statistic and 
Psychologic Problems of Sound," Die Reihe, Vol. 1, No.1, 1955, pg. 55 
(English edition, 1957)]
This is the simplest and most compelling example of the contradictory 
behavior of the ear/brain system.
The ability of the ear to extract an unambiguous fundamental frequency 
from a complex tone argues strongly in favor of the Ohm/Helmholtz 
hypothesis of the ear as a Fourier analyzer; but the ability of the 
ear to still hear a "residual" fundamental even after the fundamental 
and lower harmonics have been removed electronically cannot be 
explained by the ear-as-Fourier-analyzer model of hearing. Instead, 
"beats of mistuned consonances and periodicity pitch can be perceived 
even if each component tone is fed dichotically to a different ear.  
In such a case, of course, the complete vibration pattern never 
arises--what must arise is a superposition or interaction of the 
neural signals from both cochleas after they have been combined at 
the medullar or midbrain levels. (...) The fundamental neural message 
is given by the rate and the distribution in time with which 
individual impulses are fired along the axon." [Roederer, Juan,
"The Physics and Psychophysics of Music," 1973, pg. 45]
Thus the ability to hear such residual pitch argues against the
 Ohm/Helmholtz Fourier analyzer model of hearing, and for the 
Seebeck/Stumpf model of the ear as time-domain autocorrelator in 
which "the actual time distribution of [auditory nerve] impulses 
codes the information on repetition rate or periodicity pitch (see 
below)."  [Roederer, Juan, "The Physics and Psychophysics of 
Music," 1973, pg. 45]
However, the fact that after a brief interruption the ear hears 
exactly the same tone from which fundamental and lower harmonics 
have been electronically removed as having an entirely different 
pitch argues strongly against BOTH the Ohm/Seebeck frequency-domain 
and the Seebeck/Stumpf time-domain model of the ear, and instead 
supports the Fetis/Burns/Ward model of the ear as an adaptive 
system molded by learned responses.
Thus in one simple experiment we have compelling evidence both 
for and against all 3 major theories of hearing.
Other compelling evidence for the "contextual" behaviour of the 
ear/brain system abounds. 
"...it is to be emphasized that sound elements which are juxtaposed 
in time can have the effect that identical physical vibration 
procedures give rise to totally different sensations.  The phenomenon 
has been particularly observed in the case of synthetic explosive 
sounds such as `p',`t', `k' which may be perceived in a totally 
different manner, depending on the vowels which are juxtaposed 
to them (3).  To explain this one cannot attribute it to masking 
which has already been known for a long time becuase the 
influencing is effected by the following vowel (regressive 
dissimilation) as well as by the preceding." [Werner Meyer-Eppler, "
Statistic and Psychologic Problems of Sound,"  Die Reihe, Vol. 1, 
No.1, 1955, pg. 55 (English edition, 1957)]
Further evidence of complex phenomena possibly produced by 
interaction between the ear's frequency-domain and its 
time-domain processing functions was brought forward by 
Strong and Clark. "...in order to evaluate the  relative significance 
of spectral and temporal envelopes, [they] resorted to an 
interesting process: they exchanged the spectral and temporal 
envelopes among the wind instruments and asked listeners to 
attempt to identify these hybrid tones.  The results indicated 
that the spectral envelope was dominant if it existed in a unique 
way (as in the oboe, clarinet, bassoon, tube and trumpet); otherwise 
(as in the flute, trombone, and French horn), the temporal envelope 
was at least as important." [Risset, Jean-Claude, "Exploration of 
Timbre by Analysis and Synthesis," in "The Psychology of Music," 
ed. Diana Deutsch, 1982, pg. 36]
Some results are simply inexlicable by any of the above models: 
"Doughty and Garner (1948)...concluded that pitch was unchanging 
for tones of 25 msec and longer, but that 12-msec and 6-msec 
tones have a lower pitch.  However, Boomsliter et al., (1964) 
emphasize that the transition from "click" to "tone" depends on 
the intensity. Swigart (1964) has reported a perhaps related 
phenomneon for repeated short bursts of tone.  If one presents 
successive 8-msec bursts of 1000-Hz tone with 1-msec pauses  
between (i.e., if one cuts out every ninth cycle), the pitch is 
significantly lower than that of a continuous 1000-Hz tone.  
Just why, however, is still unclear." [Ward, W.D., "Musical 
Perception," in "Foundations of Modern Auditory Theory," ed. J.V. 
Tobias, Vol. 1, pg. 429.]
"An aspect of pitch perception that is still regarded as 
somewhat mysterious despite a goodly amount of experimentation 
is "aboslute" (or "perfect") pitch." [Ward, W.D., "Musical Perception," 
in "Foundations of Modern Auditory Theory," ed. J.V. Tobias, Vol. 1, 
pg. 429.]
"In 1973 David M. Green published some interesting results on 
temporal acuity. He measured the ear's ability to discriminate 
between two signals that have different waveforms but the same 
energy spectrum.  An example of such signals is any short waveform 
and the same waveform reversed in time, such as those in figure 
10-5.  Here Part A is a sound of decreasing frequency, Part B is a 
sound of increasing frequency. Green found that the ear can tell the 
difference between two such waveforms if their duration is greater 
than 2 milliseconds." [Pierce, J.R., "The Science of Musical Sound," 
2nd ed., 1992, pg. 149]
"On the hypothesis that critical band filters can be identified with
auditory nerve filters, the model of Zwicker and Scharf was tested by
Pickles (1983). (...) The results agreed with the psychophysical data, in
that the summed activity increased with stimulus bandwidth, for wider
timulus bandwidths. (Fig. 9.13 B).  However, there was no clear sign
of a flat portion in the function at narrow bandwidths. The reason for
this is not known..." [Pickles, James O., "An Introduction to the 
Physiology of Hearing," Academic Press, 2nd ed., 1988, pg. 283]
No model of the ear/brain system convincingly explains any of 
the above results, or for that matter one of the best-known 
quirks in musical perception: perfect pitch. Musical aesthics is 
yet another abyss which has swallowed many a psychoacoustic 
researcher. 
"Why some vibration patterns appear more "beautiful" than others 
is not known.  A great deal of research (good and bad) has been 
attempted, for instance, to find out what physical characteristics 
make a Stradivarius violin a great instrument.  Many of these 
characteristics are dynamic in character, and most of them seem 
more related to the major or minor facility with which the player 
can control the wanted tone "color" (timbre), than to a "passive" 
effect on a listener.  To a large extent the impression on the listener 
is based on learned experience..." [Roderer, Juan, "The Physics and 
Psychophysics of Music," 1973, pg. 134] 
But by far the most striking gaps in current knowledge of the 
ear/brain system involve the  question of how the human auditory 
performs 3-dimensional sound localization. 
A Head-Related Transfer Function can be measured empircially for 
each individual by means of microphones placed in the ear canals  
and an extremely high-speed computing engine, but to date no one 
has offered a general mathemtical model which predicts the HRTF, 
or the location of a specific sound using that mathematically-
modelled  HRTF.
The best example of this complete gap in our psychoacoustic 
knowledge is the inadequacy of current stereo speakers.  Even a 
6-year-old child easily detects the difference between a recording 
reproduced from digital media on high-quality stereo speakers, and 
a live performance: but to date no one has succeeded in 
formulating a mathematical model of hearing which details the 
difference in hard numbers. [See Moeller, H. K., Soerenson, M. F.,
 Hammershoei, D., and Jensen, C. B, "Head Related Transfer Functions 
of Human Subjects," J. Audio Eng. Soc., 43(5), 1995 May, pp. 
300-321; also see Appleton, J., "Machine Songs III: Music In the 
Service of Science-- Science in the Service of Music," Computer 
Music Journal, 16(3), 1992,pp. 17-21]
Clearly, there remain many unexplained aspects in the behavior of 
the ear/brain system.
The next post examines the mass of evidence gleaned from
the many psychoacoustics results confirmed and supported
by a wealth of modern.  Although the modern psychoacoustic
data is complex, it does support some conclusions.  These will
be given in the next post, after which the various biases and
prejudices of the psychoacoustic researchers themselves will
be examined...with an eye to determining how much or how little
their prejudices affected the conclusions each major researcher
drew from hi/r research.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Tue, 17 Oct 1995 01:35 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id QAA13399; Mon, 16 Oct 1995 16:34:38 -0700
Date: Mon, 16 Oct 1995 16:34:38 -0700
Message-Id: <199510162332.AA046446328@athena.ptp.hp.com>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu