source file: mills2.txt
Date: Fri, 5 Jan 1996 14:16:09 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: novelty, craftsmanship and microtonality
---
Among its many blessings, musical modernism bequeathed 
post-1945 composers  the freedom to explore new
musical forms and new musical languages.  Among its
many sins, musical modernism elevated novelty as
sole yardstick of musical value.
Like Marxism, musical modernism is now defunct.  Each
ideology  discredited itself after failing its promise to
engineer the ultimate state of human affairs.
In the case of Marxism, history had reached
its end...or so its followers were told.
Any day, "real soon now," world communism would produce
a workers' paradise.  
Similarly, in the case of musical modernism,
musical history supposedly ended in the 1920s with
Schoenberg's invention of the tone row and the various
fetishes concocted by post-Webern serialism.  After 1930,
(according to the modernists) no further musical
evolution was possible.  All future serious music, from 1930
until the end of time, could consist only of successively
more subtle refinements of serial atonal technique.
(Some would call them successively more bizarre
perversions of the basic fetish, but this is a matter
of terminology. Whether one calls one's attire "a stylish
informal outfit" or "leather S&M bondage gear" depends on
one's point of view.]
Of course the existence of *this* microtonal tuning forum
disproves musical modernism's claims.  If 12-tone
serialism was in fact the beginning and end of all musical
wisdom, why did subsequent generations of  composers 
bother to reach outside the 12 sacred tones? After all,
serial atonality stood at the very apex of musical evolution--
so any deviation from that orthodoxy constituted a fall from 
grace. Microtonality can only be viewed by the modernists
as, in John Cage's words, "just another wing on the chapel,"
one of the most breathtakingly short-sighted faux pas 
by a Zen  master of short-sightedness.
Thus anything other than the standard 12 tones per octave
constitutes a debased state of musical practice, according 
to the Holy Writ brought down from Mount Princeton by
Milton Babbitt and his toadies.
This, of course, shows up one of the most glaring flaws
of modernist dogma: in idolizing novelty for its own
sake,  modernism creates a self-destructive paradox.
To wit: if it's the ultimate endpoint of musical evolution, 
then any other kind of music cannot be taken seriously.  
But if novelty is the exclusive measure of musical value, 
then music MUST constantly change  in order to be taken 
seriously.  
Thus modernism demands that, in order to measure
up, new music simultaneously remain the same and 
constantly change.  Since this is obviously
impossible, modernist music faced irreconcilable internal
conflicts.
One harks back to the berserk computers in old Star Trek
episodes: "ERROR!  ERROR! ILLOGICAL! ERROR!"
There remains the question of which of the three tenets
of musical modernism can be salvaged for future 
generations of composers--if indeed *any* of its tenets
 can be salvaged.
The existence of this forum would tend to undermine
the odd notion that there is something sacred about
the number 12 when applied to divisions of the octave.
The whole idea is reminiscent of those alleged "666"s
in the Procter & Gamble's logo. 
But what about the value of atonal serialism, and  
of using novelty as the exclusive basis for judging 
the quality of new music?
Like most late 20th-century trends, the reaction against 
serialism has gone overboard.  Some excellent serial
 music was composed early in this century--almost
all of it prior to 1945. Perhaps with a reduction
in the total number of tones (Schoenberg's first serial
composition used 11 out of 12) or a change to new
tuning sytems, or the separation of the yoked requirements
of atonality and serialism (in 19-tone equal temperament,
for instance, a 12-tone serial row can modulate from one
key center to another--see M. Joel Mandelbaum's Prelude
No. VI, 1961) serialism will provide a useful direction
 for future composers.
This leaves the question of  using novelty as a yardstick
for quality.
By itself, novelty is a dead end.  One of the most peculiar
and interesting experiences I've had recently is in
making up a computer hard disk file of 3 CD recordings
interleaved at random.  The three compostions are
the second movement of  Schoenberg's "Five
Orchestral Pieces" from 1915, Stockhausen's "Gruppen"
from 1958 and Elliott Carter's "Orchestral Variations"
from 1989.  Each of these compositions was created
about 30-40 years apart, yet the overall effect of listening 
to them is that they're basically the same piece of music.
This illuminates the paradox of using novelty as the standard
for judging new music.  After a generation  of trying
all possible new combinations of instruments and
musical structures, new music got caught in a rut.
Very quickly all possible wacky schemes for generating
new shock-value stunts are used up: scraping phono cartridges,
shooting a machine gun at a piece of manuscipt paper,
rolling naked women in paint on a graphic score, 
performing a score without sound so that only the
finger-clicks of the woodwinds and rustle of string players' 
sleeves make noise; composing huge textural
pieces in which every piece in the orchestra perforrms a
different melody, notating impossible-to-play solo
instrumental pieces with far too many embedded
tuplets and extended techniques for humans
to perform; ad nauseum.
Wjether it's whipped cream and hamsters, or flipping coins
and burning pianos...the whole sorry spectacle tends to blur
after a while.
After a few years, every possible three-card musical 
monte trick that could be tried *had* been tried.
Thereafter, so-called "serious" modern composers ran
up against the limits of the human perceptual system.
While they continued to produce music that *looked*
ever more complex on paper, to the human ear it *sounded*
the same as last week's purportedly "breakthrough" new
composition, and as next week's supposedly "groundbreaking"
new composition, because the human perceptual system
had saturated.  
Beyond a certain level of complexity, all those notes 
lumped into a big random glob; beyond a certain
level of rhythmic subtlety, all the embedded n-tuplets
sounded like a Parkinson's patient  playing 
"chopsticks." 
Thus novelty (paradoxically) when pushed to its outermost
limit forced modern composers away from so many perceptible
and comprehensible musical structures that the only 
structures and techniques left were imperceptible.
The result?
Random-sounding junk.
This is the state at which so-called "serious" composers
(most of whose compositions could not be taken seriously)
had arrived by the late 70s, and it is also the reason for
the existence of this tuning forum.
As a result,  novelty  is not a useful yardstick of compositional
value.  Any more than the length of a composition is useful as a 
measure of value...  Other measures of compositional
quality must be found.  
I would suggest craftsmanship and competence, at 
the risk of being burned at the stake--since these values
are even more discredited nowadays than atonal
serialism.  
As witness young composers like Alison Cameron--folks 
with plenty of raw musical talent who haven't yet mastered
elementary musical skills like learning when to take a
breath (metaphorically speaking), or constructing a
musically interesting dramtic arc... Much less  the
arcane and forgotten art of counterpoint.
Oddly, although serialism and atonality have been completely 
devalued by the doyens of today's musical avant garde, most 
composers who call themselves post-modernists still worship 
at the musty altar of novelty and still obsess over the 
length of their compositions.
This is true even in microtonality, and it's proven a real
surprise to me.  More than one person has dismissed
this or that just intonation composition on the grounds
that "it's just another 7-limit piece," or "it's just another 
example of 13-limit."  
We who compose outside the 12 tone scale should take note
(all puns intended) of this lamentable trend
and be on our guard against it.  Just as novelty was
ultimately self-destructive and trivializing when misused 
as a measure of musical quality, it is equally self-
destructive when applied as the gauge of 
a microtonal composition's worth.
One of the greatest sins of musical modernism was the
devaluation of basic competence in favor of stunts and
scams.  This ultimately led to the eradication of a whole
spectrum of basic skills from an entire generation 
of composers.  
Until the recent advent of the MAX composition 
language and the widespread use of MIDI in 
post-modern music,  counterpoint was a lost
art among modern computer composers.  (With notable
exceptions: Lansky, Schottstaedt, et alii.) The ability 
to write an interesting melody, add another equally 
interesting melody on top of it, turn them both upside 
down and add another interesting melody on top, then 
reverse the whole front-to-back and add another interesting
melody on top, ad infinitum...  
This is a forgotten skill.
Just as few post-modern artists have any aptitude at
draughtsmanship because drawing is no longer
emphasized in modern art classes, today's generation
of composers have virtually no skill at counterpoint--
because it is a subject no longer emphasized in modern
music classes.  Instead, elaborate formal methods
are the focus of contemporary composition courses--
beginning (naturally) with pitch class matrix trivia and 
progressing through ever-more-convoluted, ever-more-novel
algorithmic contortions.  (I should add here that the 
current species counterpoint exercises used in
composition classes are not only useless in teaching
real-world contrapuntal skills, but probably destructive. 
Students get the idea that counterpoint is a dusty 16th-
century academic exercise without redeeming practical
value; the only way to *truly* teach counterpoint is to
require students to compose *real* pieces of music
using the techniques perfected in the era of ars subtilitas.
Since few music teachers are nowadays qualified to do this,
it's hardly any surprise that counterpoint is a lost art.
After all--how many of today's music professors can
even *pronounce* "ars subtilitas," much less demonstrate
expertly the contrapuntal techniques perfected in that
era?)
I have not addressed the question of serial counterpoint
as such since with more than two widely-separated notes
serial counterpoint is neither interesting nor perceptible,
and thus cannot be said to exist save in an abstract sense.
To his great credit, Webern understood this; the bulk of
his middle-to-late works use no more than two notes
(lines) at once.  To their great discredit, subsequent 
generations of serialists ignored this lesson.
For proof of my contention one need look no farther
than the alleged compositions of John Cage, John Corigliano,
Brian Ferneyhough and Larry Austin.  These duffers
demonstrate a complete lack of contrapuntal
skills--indeed, their level of contrapuntal ability
is so remedial as to embarrass even a junior high
school student. 
Fortunately, MIDI and MAX have radically changed
the character of avant garde. Music and composers 
of more recent vintage are beginning to discover 
that some rudiments of contrapuntal craftsmanship 
are helpful when algorithmically combining 
separate melodic strata.
Oddly enough, formal gyrations and contortions
with this or that fractal or this or that chaotic
attractor do not suffice to produce interesting
melodies combined and manipulated in interesting
ways. 
Gosh... What a shock, eh?
In the same way, the extinction of the short 
composition is a trend much to be lamented.  Indeed,
short pieces of music survive nowadays only as
commissions for large orchestra--the truism being that
if you compose anything too long and too hard,
it will take more than 1 rehearsal to learn and the
orchestra won't play it properly as its one and
only public performance.
The idea that a 2-minute composition is inherently
less "weighty" or less "substantial" than a 2-hour
composition is a bizarre notion, and one I'm at a loss
to explain.  One would expect that the collapse of the 
romantic-composer-as-titan myth would also have
discredited enormous complex multi-hour-long
pieces of new music as the ultimate ideal for
the po-mo composer...  But no.
Oddly enough, po-mo compositions seem to have
suffered *more* hypertrophy of late, rather than *less*--
po-mo works have grown even *more* Wagnerian
as the 20th century winds to a close.  Thus
Stockhausen's wacky unlistenable multi-
day-long opera "Licht," LaMonte Young's
preposterous day-long drones, and the rest
of the sorry spectacle of longer-is-better
snore-a-thons.
The idea that a 2- or 3-minute-long composition
isn't a serious piece of music seems to have taken root
even in this tuning forum.
Amazing!
It's a weird and outlandish delusion...
According to this off-kilter topsy-turvy logic,
Bach's inventions aren't "real music," they're
just "sketches" or "demonstrations."  This is
a concept so strange that it just bounces off
my brain...I cannot imagine the hebephrenic state
in which such a conclusion makes sense.
The quality of a composition depends, one
would expect, on the quality of the compostioin...
not on its tuning, its length, its instrumentation,
or any other incidental factor.
It seems to me that this is an especially mischievious
misconception, and one against which we must be 
ever-vigiliantly on guard. Particularly in
the case of microtonal compositions.  With so
many tunings to explore, xenharmonic
composers are especially liable to produce
many short compositions rather than a few
long ones.  ("So many tunings...so little time.")
Thus the pathological and fetishistic
worship of sheer length--the more minutes,
the better the piece--is particuarly pernicious
when misguidedly applied to microtonality.
--mclaren


Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Sat, 6 Jan 1996 06:20 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id VAA19051; Fri, 5 Jan 1996 21:20:24 -0800
Date: Fri, 5 Jan 1996 21:20:24 -0800
Message-Id: <960106001847_33235881@mail04.mail.aol.com>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu