source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sun, 22 Oct 1995 07:42:36 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: custom MIDI controller
---
One of the biggest stumbling blocks in
the path of the microtonal revolution is
the lack of a generalized MIDI keyboard.
If MIDI users could buy a keyboard like
the one on the Secor generalized 
Scalatron, microtonality would take
an enormous step forward.  Suddenly,
it would become simple and easy to perform
keyboard music in 31, 19, Partch 43, Wilson
41, Secor 17, or Helmholtz 24-note tunings.
Well, guess what?
Now you can build your own generalized MIDI
keyboard--and for less than $275!
PAVO, 10. S. Front St., Philadelphia PA 19106,
makes a black box to which you can hook 64
momentary normally-open switches and get
MIDI notes out.
What kind of switches can you use?
The sky's the limit: light switches, doorbell
switches, reed switches, infrared or cadmium
selenide photocells, contact switches, touch
switches, proximity switches, ultrasound-
activated switches, moisture-activated
switches, odor-activated switches...you name it.
Among the ideas PAVO suggests for novel
MIDI controllers: [1] sewing reed switches into
your clothing and generating a MIDI composition
by your movements; [2] attaching multiple
photoelectric switches to various parts of a
room and generating MIDI notes by shining a
laser; [3] building your own custom MIDI 
percussion controller or keyboard.
Of particular interest for folks on this forum
is [3].
The PAVO MIDI computer (a black box with a
64-lead ribbon cable coming out of it and MIDI
IN and MIDI OUT connectors) comes in kit form.
The cost is $265 U.S. and with that you get the
PROM of your choice.  (PAVO black boxes can do
a *lot* of things; the 64-note MIDI controller PROM
is only *one* of many PROMS they offer.  You can,
for example, turn the black box into a "translating
randomizer" merely by substituting another PROM
into the ZIF socket inside the black box.  In this
mode the PAVO black box selectively translates one 
type of MIDI message into any other type of MIDI message,
randomizing them within user-selected parameters
entered into the front panel.  However this post
concerns only the 64-note custom MIDI controller
EPROM, so if you want more info on the many *other*
exotic applications of their MIDI computer black
box, write PAVO directly. That address again:
PAVO, 10. S. Front St., Philadelphia PA 19106)
The limitations of the PAVO box, are to be fair,
numerous: first, you're limited to 64 input switches.
(If you need a 128-key controller, buy two black
boxes and hook their outputs through a MIDI merge
box; ditto 192-key controller, etc.  At $250 per
black box, this isn't all that expensive--especially
compared to the *outrageous* highway-robbery cost
of $2000 for a 36-pad MIDI marimba bought 
commerically!)
Second, the switches can't be more than 25 feet from
the PAVO black box (and should probably be a lot
closer for reliable operation).  Most limiting of all,
the black box does not accept velocity information
from the switches.  Thus you must set the velocity
of the MIDI notes either via a pot on the front panel
of the black box, or by means of a MIDI controller
foot pedal hooked into the data stream with a MIDI
merge box.  (It's possible that you might be able
to wire an 8-bit A/D converter to the frame of the
MIDI controller and feed it into the front pot of the
PAVO black box, but since it's not part of the original
design...you'd have to do it at your own risk.)
All in all, these limitations are minor compared to
the advantages offered by this widget.  For the first
time, you can build your own custom MIDI percussion
setup.  One of the first and most obvious applications
that comes to mind would be to set up a set of plywood
or pine squares in the form of a 64-note Bosanquet
keyboard and attach the squares to reed or touch
switches, then solder the switches to the ribbon
cable leads.  Plus in the black box, turn it on, and presto!
You've got your own Bosqnquet-style percussion controller.
This would be ideal especially for those of us you yearn to
work in large JI arrays (say, Wilson 31 or 41 or 43, not
to mention D'Alessandro or the hebdomekontany) with
a percussion-type controller.  
By fitting the switch array with a DB-25 connector, one
could easily disconnect one percussion controller and 
reconnect another one, thus allowing a performer to move
within a less than minute from, say, Partch 43 to 53-tone
equal temperament.  Since switches are cheap (check the
latest JDR MICRODEVICES catalog) and plywood or pine
even cheaper, it should be a breeze to build half a dozen
different percussion arrays, each suited to a given tuning.
(Remember that since we're dealing with MIDI, one need
only saw the pieces of wood and glue switches to 'em--
all tuning's done in the MIDI synth.)
Neoprene coverings on the plywood or wooden percussion
pads would help give the percussion pads a more lifelike
"feel," and again it's cheap and easy.
Building the PAVO black box sounds pretty simple.
They offer a videotape showing the complete process (for
those of you who haven't dealt with a soldering iron and
a volftmeter before), as well as a diagnostic EPROM. Plug
in the EPROM and it'll automatically check your solder
connections, chips, glue logic, and run a test on the MIDI
ins and outs as well as the 64-lead ribbon connector (via
loop-through).
PAVO claims that assembly of one of their black boxes
takes 5-7 hours, and given the apparent simplicity of
the circuitry inside their box, that sounds reasonable.
It's basically nothing but an antique 6809 8-bit
microprocessor with an EPROM, a kilobyte or so of
static RAM and some glue logic and hex buffers to
keep the inputs and outputs from fricasseeing if you
accidentally hook a MIDI out to the black box's MIDI OUT.
All told, this is spectacular development for  those of us
who burn with the bestial desire to build Bosanquet
MIDI controllers!
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Sun, 22 Oct 1995 23:59 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id OAA00139; Sun, 22 Oct 1995 14:58:49 -0700
Date: Sun, 22 Oct 1995 14:58:49 -0700
Message-Id: <951022215607_71670.2576_HHB46-1@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu