source file: mills2.txt
Date: Wed, 1 Nov 1995 10:05:06 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Music & western science
---
On encountering the interesting book
"Measure for measure: a musical history
of science," by Thomas Levenson, one
passage in particular caught my eye:
"Music and science have been intertwined in
Western thinking from the moment of their
shared origins, of course: the first even
vaguely scientific theory of the universe
was a musical one, Pythagoras' arrangement 
of the planets on the scaffolding of his musical
intervals, with every heavenly body sounding
out its note in what became known as the music
of the spheres." [Levenson, T.,  1994, pg. 13]
Even though this is probably incorrect (the
Bablyonians, Egyptians & Sumerians likely
originated most of the musical and geometric
discoveries attributed to Pythagoras), Levenson
makes a cogent point.
To a large extent the current schism in music can be
described by the three stages of Western science:
Newtonian science, quantum theory and nonlinear
dynamics.
The Newtonian model of the universe is a giant
clockwork mechanism.  Harmonic cycles naturally
arise from such a scheme: the well-known 
example in elementary physics textbooks of
planetary orbits as clocks naturally suggests the
idea of ratios between oscillating cycles of 
both planetary and (inside the atom) electron-
orbital motion.
In the macroscopic everyday world, tides,
rates of chemical reaction, the compounding
increase in velocity produced by uniform Newtonian 
acceleration, as well as the  densities of
Maxwell's electric and magnetic fields as a
function of distance from the charge center all
produce sets of ratios.  In a Newtonian universe, it's
hard to escape from ratios--and many of them 
involve small integers.
Such a worldview inevitably tilts toward just intonation.
This bias is not necessarily conscious.  It is so pervasive
that it often shows up as an unconscious or even
as a subsconscious  assumption--a "well, of 
course...obviously" set of musical axioms 
from which all subsequent musical theorems derive.
In the quantum universe, however, particles are
replaced by probability  waves--exotic
critters often called "wavicles."  The best way 
to deal with a quantum universe is a pragmatic
approach: sum the probabilities, assume the
most likely interaction, calculate the likely result.
This sort of approach suggests equal temperament--
not a perfect intonation, but given the pragmatic
realities (and the uncertainties in performed
pitch and actual tuning) the best compromise.
Chaos theory views the universe as a playground
for nonlinear dynamics.  Here, bifurcation and
period-doubling render predictions useless even
when made by the most powerful computers: 
an *infinite* number of digits is necessary
to represent initial conditions accurately.
In the real universe of nonlinear mechanics,
planetary orbits grow chaotic and cannot be
used as celestial clocks over more than a few
hundred million years. (See "Newton's Clock,"
Ivars Peterson, 1994.)
This view of the universe stresses the nonlinearity
of real physical processes and naturally gives rise
to non-just non-equal-tempered tunings (that is,
tunings not generated either by Nth roots of K or
by ratios of integers).  These tunings are just
as "natural" as the harmonic series...yet such tunings
are profoundly alien to Western music.
It occurs to me that a good deal of the friction on
this tuning forum between advocates of this or that
tuning system derives from a deeper cognitive
dissonance twixt contrary worldviews.  One of the implicit
goals of the JI crowd seems to be a clear distinction
between consonance and dissonance: this implies, presumably,
 that consonance can be unambiguously defined as
*sensory* consonance, and that more complex notions
like concordance and ambisonance can be derived
directly therefrom.  In a universe thus ordered,
the JI view is that of a cosmos capable of balance,
rationality, harmony and what the Hellenes called
"taxis," along with the related concept of "logos"
(which only very rarely means "word:" more often
"logos" mean "underlying order behind," as in
meteorology = "the underlying order behind the
sky.")
The main goal of the equal-tempered crowd, by contrast,
seems to be "to get something that works with usable
instruments."  Equal temperament aficionados stress
the ease of modulation, the ready-to-use simplicity of
their tunings.  No infinite sea of commas, no troubling
hard-to-classify intervals like the 11/9 or the 9/7.
This accords with a subconscious view of the universe
as a place in which uncertainty and chance conspire to
defeat efforts to attain harmony, balance, simplicity:
instead, the best we can hope for (according to this
view) is a workable compromise.
The chaos-theory worldview is by far the most radical.
It's one that's still working its way through our culture.
While the Newtonian cosmos produced Baroque music
and Christopher Wren's architecture, and the quantum
worldview produced modernism and Bauhaus glass-cube
monopitch-roof architecture, the chaos-theory universe hasn't
yet made its full impact felt on art and music and
literature.  A few compositions like Bruno de Gazio's
algorithmic works of the early 1990s and Mark Trayle's
Mattel Power Glove compositions have filtered into
our consciousness...but by and large the *weltbildung*
suggested by chaos theory seems hallucinogenic to 
Western artists and composers and writers.  The idea
that the universe is a place shaped by violent, complex, 
unexpected events which grow out of microscopic
chance events...well, it's  not a comfortable one.
The notion of huge effects blossoming from trivial causes
is not something with which Aristotelian dramatic
theory is well equipped to cope.  It's as though Oedipus were
and his entire family were to die horribly from infections 
caused by scratching mosquito bites(!) In music, however,
the seeds of this kind of exponential and uncontrolled
growth of emergent structure  have always been nascent
in Western tradition.  Ever since composers began to
generate huge compositions from small cellular
motifs, the notion of order boiling out of chaos seems
to have lurked just outside the peripheral vision of
Western music theory.
Of course, non-just non-equal-tempered tunings
are particularly alien to our (read: white European) 
concept of music. 
And so it's fascinating to note the historical Western
response to the Indonesian gamelan, which uses a
classic n-j n-e-t tuning (in fact, each gamelan
uses a different one).
The first time a Western composer appears to have
encountered the gamelan was when Debussy heard 
one at the Paris Exposition in 1895.  He was struck
most forcefully by the rhythms, which he ecstatically
described as "complex enough to put the finest
Western composers to shame" (or words to that effect;
this is from memory).
Mantle Hood's importation of a gamelan in 1956 appears
to have sparked Lou Harrison's interest, and a general
American gamelan movement--ironically founded on
tunings using just intonation.  As Marc Perlman has
pointed out,  this is a radical departure from actual
Javanese/Balinese tuning practice...  And it indicates
just how completely *unable* Western composers are
to assimilate the Javanese tuning in its *own terms.*
Indeed, Lou Harrison himself admitted to being
terrified of the non-just non-equal-tempered intervals
of "slippery slendro;"  without the Western rationalistic
landmark of small integers, he found himself at sea.
And finally during the 80s and early 90s digital signal
processing compositions produced with the spectra
and tones of gamelans (for example, Robert Valin's
"Tat tvam asi," 1990, UMUS CD "Bali In Montreal,"
UMM CD 104) again emphasize Fourier manipulations and 
transformations.  *Again* the Western composer is 
reduced to grasping at harmonics and integer-ratio
frequencies *even* when manipulating the raw
non-integer, inharmonic, non-just non-equal-tempered
partials and spectra of Javanese/Balinese
gamelan: *again,* there is a complete inability to
incorporate the gamelan worldview into the composer's
milieu and assimilate it as part of Western compositional
process. Instead, the Javanese n-j n-e-t tuning and
chaos-theory worldview of clashing rhythms producing
a mysteriously regular emergent order can *only* be
assimilated by the Western composer/theorist
if *first* coated with the antibodies of Fourier theory
and harmonic overtones.
Thus it's fascinating to observe the clashes between
these three factions on this tuning forum.  My 
observations concerning non-just non-equal-tempered
tunings matched to n-j n-e-t additive-synthesis timbres
have provoked incomprehension, with some outright
hostility and no little puzzlement thrown in; meanwhile,
the main hot spot seems to be the flash point between 
equal temperament advocates and JI enthusiasts.
This is particularly revealing because it shows not
only the tremendously long lead time for new ideas 
to percolate from the sciences into the arts, but it
also clearly demonstrates the enormous staying power of
classic worldviews. Many writers on just intonation
evoke a view of Apollonian poise and balance, and a
yearning for perfect order.  Indeed, the title of one
of the best current compilation series of JI music is in
itself revealing: "Rational Music For An Irrational
World."  A vision of literally classical order in a disarrayed
universe.   And (also revealingly) JI composers see
 have a fondness for classical Hellenic subject 
matter: from Partch's exceptional series of settings
of Greek drama to Fonville's setting of poems by
Sappho, the nostalgic quest for order and balance
harks back to the Italian Renaissance, the early part of 
the 19th century in England, and the early 20s
of this century in England and America.  In such a
worldview, Keats' Greek vase is the ideal: "Heard melodies
are sweet, but those unheard/are sweeter; therefore,
ye soft pipes, play on;/ not to the sensual ear, but,
more endeared,/Pipe to the spirit ditties of no tone..."
[Keats, John, "Ode On A Grecian Urn," lines 11-14]
(Sounds almost as though Keats yearned for a yet-
unheard xenharmonic music far outside the 19th
century 12-tone equal tempered scheme of things...)
 Modernism rarely evokes such longings.  Instead, the
emphasis in modernist music is often on statistical
and probabilistic effects. From the regular distribution
of pitch classes in the 2nd School of Vienna to the
thermodynamically- and quantum-theory inspired
stochastic sound-clouds of Xenakis, much modernist
music might almost be called  "quantum probability-
clouds made audible."  Subsequent refinement of these
procedures in algorithmic compositions programs 
changed the emphasis, but not the essential inspiration--
nor the worldview implied.
And thus the best of modernist compositions conjure
up for me a statistically determined universe of 
strange and terrifying beauty...and notably one in which
tuning is a secondary consideration.  Modernist 
music appears to have emphasized the processes by
which pitches were *ordered,* rather than by which they
were *derived.*
Perhaps the existence of this forum signals a shift
toward the third or nonlinear worldview.  As the ideas
of chaos theory and complexity theory seep
into our culture, the notion of emergent order generated
at the edge of nonlinear musical processes becomes
more "natural" (the single word most fiercely
argued over on this forum, and perhaps the one word
used by the largest number of subscribers with the
largest numbers of different meanings) and more
acceptable.
Pushing forward, it's hard to see where this worldview
might take music...  The terrain ahead is indeed
alien.  One imagines algorithmic compositions generated
by nonlinear processes in which even the tuning is
produced at run-time, and is a different non-just non-
equal-tempered set of pitches in each performance.
On the level of the microstructure of musical tones,
Sethares', Pierce's, Carlos', Dashow's and (yes) my
notion of matching partials to tuning raises many
possibilities from hierarchical order in n-j n-e-t
compositions: notes whose overtone structure changes
kaleidoscopically as the pitches run through various
timbral strange attractors.  Jean-Claude Risset, Paul Lansky,
John Chowning, James Dashow, William Schottstaedt, 
Richard Karpen, Mark Trayle, Cindy McTee, Richard Boulanger,
Hugh Davies, Jonathan Harvey, Warren Burt, William Sethares 
and others have already produced compositions which
give a glimpse of this brave new musical world: and they
are indeed breathtakingly beautiful. 
Still, very little work has been done in this area.  To quote
Ivor Darreg, "It will require the work of many composers 
for many years to map out the vastness of xenharmonic 
territory."
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Wed, 1 Nov 1995 20:55 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id KAA19194; Wed, 1 Nov 1995 10:55:39 -0800
Date: Wed, 1 Nov 1995 10:55:39 -0800
Message-Id: <199511011848.AA22720@net4you.co.at>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu