source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sun, 1 Oct 1995 09:31:39 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & Psychoacoustics - post 8 of 25
---
As xenharmonists, it's of some interest to us
exactly how the ear/brain system works.  If the
human ear favors one tuning system over another,
we want to know about it. 
Alas, the evidence is far from clear, and there are
problems with all three hypotheses of ear/brain
function.
Concerning the place and periodicity hypotheses
of hearing, "On current evidence, it is not possible
to decide betwene the temporal and place theories
of frequency distribution. (..) In any case the best
support for the eclectic [pattern recognition] view
is the rather negative one that the evidence in favour
of either of the other two theories is not conclusive,
and this may be a function of the quality of evidence
available, rather than of the actual operation of the
auditory system." [Pickles, James O., "An
Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing," Academic
Press,  2nd ed., 1988, pg. 277]
Risset summarizes the evidence for and problems
with all 3 proposed ear/brain mechanisms in
his 1978 IRCAM report: "Numerological theories of
consonance suffer difficulties. Because of the
ear's tolerance, intervals corresponding to 3:2 (a
simple ratio) and 300,001/200,000 (a complex 
ratio) are not discriminated. Also psychophysiological
evidence indicates that numerical ratios should not
be taken for granted. The subjective octave corresponds
to a frequency ratio a little larger than 2, and is
reliably different for different individuals (Ward,
1954; Sundberg and Lindqvist, 1973); this effect
is increased by sleep-deprivation (Elfner, 1964).
There are also physical theories of consonance. 
Helmholtz (1877) links the degree of dissonance
to the audibility of beats between the the partials
of the tones.  This theory is hardly tenable, 
because the pattern of beats, for a given interval,
depends very much on the placement of the
interval within the audible frequency range. Recent
observations (Plomp, 1966) suggest an improved
physical explanation of consonance: listeners find
that the dissonance of a pair of pure tones is maximum
when the tones are about a quarter of a critical
bandwidth apart; the tones are judged consonant
when they are more than one critical bandwidth
apart. Based on this premise, Pierce (1966, also
in von Foerster and Beuachamp, 1969, pp. 129-132)
has used tones made up on non-harmonic partials, 
so taht the ratios of fundamnetal leading to
consonance are not the conventional ones:
Kameoka et al. (1969). have developed an 
involved method to calculate the magnitude
of disonance...
"Whereas the explanation put forth by Plomp
can be useful to evalutate the "smoothnesss"
or "roughness" of a combination of tones, it
is certainly insufficient to account for
musical consonance. In a laboratory study,
Van de Geer et al., (1962) found that intervals 
judged the most consonant
by laymen do not correspondent to the ones
usually term consonant. This result is
elaborated by recent work by Fuda and Wessel (1977).
The term consonance seems ambiguous, since it 
refers at the same time ot an elemental level,
where "smoothness" and "roughness" are
revaluated, and to a higher esthetic level,
where consonance can be functional in a given
style. The two levels are related in a culture-
bound fashion. In music, one does not judge only
the consonance of isolated tones: as Cazden (1945)
states, "context is the determining factor. (...) the
resoution of intervals does not have a natural
basis; it is a common response acquired by all
individuals within a culture area (cf. also Lundin,
1947)." Musical consonance is relative to a musical
style ( Guernesey, 1928); ninth chords, dissonant
in Mozart's music, are treated as consonant by
Debussy (Chailley, 1951; Cazden, 1962, 1968, 1972).
The cultural and contextual aspects of musical
consonance are so important that, despite nativists'
claims to the contrary, purely mathematical and/or
physical explanations can only be part of the story.
cf. Costere, 1962)." [Risset, J-C., "Musical Acoustics,"
Rapports IRCAM, 1978 pp. 7-8]
In short, all 3 hypotheses of hearing explain different
aspects of the  ear/brain system.  Depending on the
acoustic stimulus, different systems appear to  operate
to process sound. This is most powerfully evidenced by Sethares,
W., "Local Consonance and the Interaction between
Timbre and Tuning," JASA, vol. 94 No. 3, 1993, pp. 1218-1219,
Slaymaker, J., "Inharmonic Tones," JASA         1970, and 
 Roads, C. "An Interview with Max Mathews," Computer Music
Journal, 1980.  
In the latter, Mathews points out: 
"Our initial experiments were aimed at finding 
out what properties of normal harmonic music
carried over to music that was made with
stretched overtones. We found some things
carried over and some things did not. The
sense of "key" carried over better than we
expected.
ROADS: So you can actually detect "keys" in
sequences of completely inharmonic sounds.
MATHEWS: That's right. You play two samples
and a person can reliably say whether they're
in the same or a different key.
Other properties do not carry over. The sense
of finality in a traditional cadence does
not carry over. A person who hears a cadence
with unstretched tones says, "That sounds
very final to me." When he hears the same
cadence played with stretched tones, he'll
say "That doesn't sound especially final." But
we have been able to make other inharmonic
materials which do convey a sense of cadence.
(...)
ROADS: If we can detect "keys" and some form
of finality within a cadence or progressions
within inharmonic tones, then some of the 
theories of harmony in the past must not have
been as cogent as some of their proponents
have thought them to be.
MATHEWS: Our results are contradictory. We
loked at two theories. One was the Rameau
theory of the fundamental bass, and the other
was the Helmholtz and Plomp theory of the
consonance and dissonance of overtones. The
destruction of the cadence would support
the Rameau theory and the persistence of
the sense of key would support the Helmholtz
and Plomp theory. So we have one result which
supports one theory and one which supports the 
other, with the overall conclusion that the world 
a more complicated place than we had perhaps
hoped it was. We will have to dig deeper
before we can say which is causing
the various perceptions we find meaningful
to music" [Roads. C, "An Interview With Max
Mathews, Comp. Mus. Journ., Vol 4 No. 4, 1980,
pp. 21-22]
MYTH: PITCH PERCEPTION IS SIMPLE, AND
CONSONANCE, DISSONANCE AND HARMONY
CAN BE EXPLAINED BY EITHER RAMEAU'S
OR HELMHOLTZ'S MODELS
FACT: Musical phenomena are a complex
interaction of at least 3 ear/brain mechanisms
for recognizing and assigned pitch, and
each ear/brain system can conflict with
the other 2, leading to paradoxical results,
auditory illusions and a great deal of learned
behaviour on the part of the listener as to
what "consonance," "dissonance," and even what
"pitch" is.
This latter will prompt the usual screams
of protest from those into whose brainpans
little information about modern psychoacoustics
has dripped; thus it is important to
make clear that even something as purportedly
"elementary" and "innate" as the pitch sense
displays extremely complex behaviour. 
The next post will examine the meaning(s)
of the term "pitch," the psychophysical
factors which influence its perception, and
the implications for tuning & music.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Sun, 1 Oct 1995 20:53 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id LAA27839; Sun, 1 Oct 1995 11:52:54 -0700
Date: Sun, 1 Oct 1995 11:52:54 -0700
Message-Id: <199510011852.AA24025@net4you.co.at>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu