source file: mills2.txt
Date: Wed, 20 Dec 1995 13:02:56 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject:  The collapse of innovation 
in post-1988 synthesizer technology
---
In a previous post, Your Humble E-Mail 
Correspondent mentioned the general
excellence of Ensoniq's synths.  They
sound about as good as anything else out
there,  Ensoniq synths are rock-solid
reliable, and their sampler operating
systems are particularly intuitive and
easy to use.  Anyone who battled the
hellish TX16-W Yamaha sampler operating
system or the botched E-Mu sampler OS's
from the late 80s is well qualified to
appreciate the excellence of the EPS/
EPS-16/ASR-10's operating system. 
However,  there's still plenty of room
for improvement in the Ensoniq line.
Someone posted a query about that--how
can anyone say Ensoniq isn't up to date
technologically?
Here's how:
[1] The ASR-10 needs more RAM.  A *LOT*
more RAM.  Right now, the Kurzweill 2500
series can take up to 128 megs.  This
is a reasonable minimum amount: 256 megs
would be more like it.  But 128 megs is a
start.
The ASR-10, by contrast, is stuck with 16 megs.
This is around 90 seconds of sampling time at
44.1 khz stereo.  Completely unacceptable.  Far
too small an amount of RAM to be useful.
Part of the problem is the kbd controller chip
Ensoniq uses to address the RAM, part of the
problem is the burden of maintaining backwards
compatability with the EPS/EPS-16 &c.  
Backward compatability must go.  The ASR-10's
successor needs more RAM.  A *LOT* more.  
With EDO, the people at Ensoniq need to start
thinking in terms of *gigabytes* of RAM.
(As always, readers will call this "insane"
today, "a little over the top," in 6 months,
and "very sensible, but somewhat conservative"
in a year.) 
[2] A rule of thumb is that a decent saxophone
or clarinet needs 25-40 multisamples.  The
ASR-10 allows 8 layers per instrument, 
8 instruments total.  This is utterly inadequate.
Backward compatability must go.  Dump the 8
layer limit.  At least 127 A-B crossfades should
be allowed per multisampled instrumnet, at least
16 MIDI channels/instruments at a time.
[3] David Doty made a point about accessing various
layers during performance.  Clearly Ensoniq needs
to upgrade the ASR-10's successor to allow MIDI
access to each of the 127 layers within an
instrument.  Since these would often be used for
alternate tunings, it's a particular priority.
[4] Ensoniq may want to think about implementing
some new technology.  
Ever since innovation ground to a screeching halt
in the synthesizer industry, somewhere around 1988,
industry pundits have wondered why sales of
digital keyboard instruments have dropped
steadily.
There's no mystery. 
The Korg M-1 provided the original and ever since
then all the keyboard manufacturers have concentrated
on cranking out endless xerox copies of that instrument,
all using exactly the same antique technology:
sample playback.
With the exception of the Yamaha VL-1M/VL-7 and
the E-Mu Morpheus, all current synthesizers are 
nothing but sample playback machines that spit back
digital recordings burned into ROM when you press
a key.
Now, there's nothing wrong with sample playback. It's
a fine technology.  But after a while,  you get tired of
hearing nothing but sample playback.
Even today's samplers use exactly the same technology--
with the only wrinkle being that *you* get to choose 
what digital recording is regurgitated when you press
a key, instead of *the synth company** choosing the sound.
All today's synths are basically nothing but digital
Mellotrons.  Where's the synthesis?
Does anyone remember the origin of the term "synthesizer"?
These instruments are supposed to *generate new sounds.*
Instead, we get yet another canned B-3 sample
burned into ROM.  And no matter how mich reverb, phasing,
ring modulation, flanging or delay you slather on top of
a sound burned into ROM, it all sounds pretty much the
same.
Around 1988, synth companies stopped making synthesizers.
Instead, they all followed the cattle stampede toward
the easy dollar.
The net result is that there is today hardly any reason
to buy one synth from one manufacturer rather than another.
Ensoniq's tuning tables make a difference.  But if they *really*
want to increase sales, how about building some actual 
synthesizers for a change?
Even Yamah has dropped the ball.  Today, if you want to
buy an FM synth you're out of luck.  You have to buy one
used, or pay for a Kyma.
The brutal reality is there are *dozens* of synthesis
methods: digital additive, subtractive, frequency
modulation, amplitude modulation, Chebyshev
distortion, Miller Puckette's formant synthesis,
Lansky's LPC synthesis, phase vocoder analysis/
resynthesis, Daubechies wavelets, Walsh function 
analysis/resynthesis, Dashow's exponentiation
synthesis, Hiller & Ruiz's physical modelling
synthesis, waveguide synthesis, many others.
Yet aside from Yamaha's VL-7/VL-1M physical
modelling synth, not a single manufacturer has
implemented *any* of these synthesis techniques
in a currently available commercial synthesizer.
Amazing.
Shocking.
Yet true.
If Ensoniq wants to jump-start synth sales,
they might think about implementing some of
these synthesis techniques.
Now that Korg's OASYS synthesizer has been
discontinued--yet another case of classic
vaporware--and the Gibson/G-WIZ labs' FAR
Fourier resynthesizer cannot be purchased
by anyone, anywhere, for any reason, at any time,
any way, shape or form...well, now that these
vaporware instruments have bitten the dust,
what else is there on the horizon?
Zero.
Zilch.
Zip.
Squat.
Diddly.
Nada.
These synths have joined the parade of
vaporware formed by the Prism synthesizer
(remember that one?), the additive synth
built from the Amiga's Amy sound chip
(256 additive partials--it gobbled the Amiga's
entire CPU and memory so the company dumped
it and licensed the rights to a start-up which
was promptly sued out of existence), and the
marvellous Technos 16pi...a synthesizer which,
if it had ever existed, would have been 
superlative.
Well, chances are this is all blue-sky
fabulation.  Chances are Ensoniq won't bother
to actually build synthesizers.  Too much work.
And the MR rack tends to bolster that 
viewpoint.  Yet another wannabe sample-playback
box, yet another digital Mellotron.  
It's ironic that Ensoniq is giving up the opportunity
to crush the Japanese synth companies.  What with
their little Yen crisis and teetering financial
system, this is an ideal chance for American synth
companies to steal back the initiative that was
lost when the Japanese licensed FM technology
and ground the American analog synth manufacturers
into the dirt back circa 1983.
In any case, these remarks should be understood
inthe context of making Ensoniq's excellent products
better.  Rather than angering the engineers and
management at Ensoniq, perhaps these words 
will irk them into improving already fine
synths.
N.B.: Even though the Kurzweil 2500 series offers
gobs of RAM, the sampler does *NOT* have a
full-keyboard tuning table.  Thus my next sampler
will be an ASR-10.  Also, Dave Rossum at E-Mu
needs to take a look at Ensoniq's multiple tuning
tables and realize the *immense* importance of
more than one tuning table.  JI compositions
which change key centers demand multiple tuning
tables, as does work with (say) a Wilson 70-note
hebdomekontany in only 128 MIDI notes.  Allen
Strange has mentioned that he gets only 3 octaves
of Partch's 43-tone just scale in MIDI's 128 notes;
using the same timbre on 3 MIDI channels tuned
3 octaves apart would increase his range to
9 octaves.  And, as usual, Ensoniq is the *only*
current manufacurer to support multiple tuning
tables.
Thus, for many microtonal applications, Ensoniq
synths remain the only real choice.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Wed, 20 Dec 1995 22:57 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id NAA26137; Wed, 20 Dec 1995 13:56:54 -0800
Date: Wed, 20 Dec 1995 13:56:54 -0800
Message-Id: <v01530501acfddf656c7a@[128.83.112.40]>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu