source file: m1588.txt
Date: Fri, 20 Nov 1998 15:48:32 -0500

Subject: RE: Triads, tuners, tonality

From: "Paul H. Erlich" <PErlich@Acadian-Asset.com>

Hello Daniel Wolf and thank you for your intelligent comments. I will
reply to them below and hope that you will consider my replies with an
open mind. I see no need for the hostile tone that our arguments often
take on and I apologize if I have contributed to that tone in the past.

>I have witnessed both Balzano and Babbitt demonstrate virtuoso
>aural command over the tonal materials in their respective systems
(Balza=
>no
>in 20tet, Babbitt in 12tet), demonstrating convincingly that 'set and
>group' properties are not just abstract constructions but real
resources
>for organizing musical works.

I don't doubt it -- but it must have taken them some compositional
ingenuity to avoid the tonal implications of simple intervals in order
to make these other features reign. Where can I get Balzano's music to
listen to? 

>Hearing highly structured, non-tonal music =

Balzano's system is supposed to be as "tonal" as traditional diatonic
music, according to his theory. He explicitly rejects the important of
simple ratios, except (implicitly) powers of two, in the development of
Western tonality and tuning. That is the point where I exclaim, "bunk!"
Similarly for Clough&Douthett with respect to Indian music. . .

>in
>these temperaments may not reflect the modes of audition closest to the
>biases of the physiological system, but it does remind one that the
physi=
>cs
>of musical intervals has no such bias and that musical cognition, with
>training, can be a far richer resource than the ear alone. (In
different
>domains, the works of Alvin Lucier are constantly demonstrating that
the
>frequencies in the margins between rhythm and pitch or pitch and timbre
a=
>re
>both perceivable and musical rich.)

I prefer to build cognition upon, rather than reject, the biases of the
psychological system. Music that is "out," i.e., far from tonal, can
fascinate me for long periods of time, but once in a while I break down
and want to hear something that pleases me on a visceral, almost
precognitive level.

>If Mr. Erlich has a formula for determining the relative strength of an
>"organizing force in music", I would certainly like to know it.
Naturally=
>,
>this should be independent of any local cultural biases. =

Clearly this is absurd, perhaps some kind of mockery of my quantitative
bent. I did say "the music I enjoy". Therefore I can't declare myself
independent of local cultural biases (but then again neither can anyone
else).

>I can't help but note that I find it surpring that Mr. Erlich is
framing
>his argument in this way. His own work in 22tet is within a systwm
whose
>set and group properties are certainly more useful than the quality of
it=
>s
>representation of ratios of small whole numbers.  =

Please elaborate. If you mean the properties I describe in my paper,
note that virtually all these properties presuppose representations of
ratios of small whole numbers. If you don't mean those, then which ones
do you mean? Also note that 22tET's representation of 7-limit ratios is
about as good as 12tET's representation of 5-limit ratios, and that
12tET evolved in, and largely superceded the authentic tunings of, a
musical style where 5-limit ratios were of primary importance (it could
do so because the quality of its approximations was sufficient). I do
examine non-ET 7-limit tunings which contain the scales in my paper, but
find that they are optimally tuned very close to 22tET. The impetus for
choosing an ET rather than an open, meantone-type system is certainly a
"group" property, that of infinite transposability with a finite number
of notes. I would be more than happy to advocate a non-ET, open 7-limit
tuning if it had any significant acoustical advantages over 22tET. It
doesn't.

On the other hand, meantone is audibly superior to 12tET for 5-limit
diatonic music, and the important group property of transposability can
be recovered for meantone in 19 or 31tET. Musicians chose 12tET over 19
or 31tET only for convenience. Therefore, for Balzano or Clough to
ascribe features of tonal practice (ones that date back to the meantone
era) to properties of 12 which are not shared by 31, amounts to a sort
of revisionism that I object to.