source file: mills2.txt
Date: Wed, 31 Jul 1996 13:37:44 -0700

Subject: RE: elitism, etc.

From: PAULE <ACADIAN/ACADIAN/PAULE%Acadian@mcimail.com>

Neil, how right you are and how often I have experienced that. If another 
opera singer tells me, "I can sing the blues, it's easy, I'm classically 
trained, I can sing anything," I'm going to punch 'em in the nose. I grew up 
with Bach around the house, so that works its way into my playing more than 
anything, but the kind of technique involved there has nothing to do with 
the blues. Over the last few years, I have had some real blues moments, 
where it just came out, and sounded so perfect, and then at other times it 
just sounds like a lame transcription of the blues. Of course, it's all 
about feeling, and getting a beer in you can help too.

You literally have to approach the instrument in a different way depending 
on the style of music you're playing. Physically, mentally, emotionally, the 
act of playing one style of music is different from any other style. That is 
not to say one can't mix elements of different styles to produce something 
new and great, but to do that takes a grounding in all of those styles. 
Being a musician alive in the world today, one should strive for more than 
just to be the best flugelhorn player in the conservatory, or the meanest 
blues harpist in town. One should listen to different styles, and really 
listen, with soul as well as ears.

I think the problem with a lot of classical music is that it perpetuates 
itself in written form, and that most teachers and conservatories simply 
can't immerse the students in a true representation of original playing 
styles. Occasionally a musician will come along and breathe life into the 
music, but this takes an unusual amount of sensitivity. So what you get is 
lots of bad performances of classical music -- and the sad thing is that few 
people notice. Most people who go to classical concerts do it as a show of 
social and intellectual status, and most classical soloists these days are 
nothing more than acrobats. The same thing seems to be happening to jazz 
here in Boston -- it's very scary. Not to say that the state of popular 
music around here a lot better. But the point is that the elitism associated 
with certain styles of music is as unfounded as the popularity associated 
with certain other styles.

A lot of us are interested in the intellectual games of finding new sounds 
to compose and improvise with. That's what keeps music alive, keeps it from 
getting boring. But that doesn't mean that some guy with two whistles and 
three bells isn't going to come along and blow us all away with the depth of 
his music. Instead of closing our ears to "simple" music, such a blues tune, 
I think we should all listen a lot more closely to the subtleties of 
expression there, and how much meaning those subtleties have -- more 
meaning, sometimes, than an hour-long symphony. If it doesn't have enough 
chords for those highbrow folks, it's too bad they can't just listen to the 
music and understand it for what it is, or at least appreciate the fact that 
in pitch inflection, rhythm, and dynamics, there can be a lot more subtlety 
there than in your average classical performance. Subscribing to the 
attitude that one style of music is "better," that's what I call elitism. 
There are blues elitists too, and rock elitists and country elitists and 
Indian music elitists and Japanese music elitists I'm sure, and all of it 
stinks.


Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Wed, 31 Jul 1996 22:59 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id NAA02738; Wed, 31 Jul 1996 13:59:09 -0700
Date: Wed, 31 Jul 1996 13:59:09 -0700
Message-Id: <80960731205708/0005695065PK3EM@MCIMAIL.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu