source file: mills2.txt
Date: Sat, 22 Jun 1996 11:24:49 -0700

Subject: Post from McLaren

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

From: mclaren
Subject: Neil Haverstick's evaluation of Partch as
 a composer
---
Neil Haverstick is one of the most talented guitarists
I've had the pleasure to hear.  His "MicroStock" in
Colorado has rapidly become one of the most important
microtonal concert venues in the U.S., and Neil is
the prime mover in that effort.
However, permit me to join with Denny Genovese in
disagreeing Neil's opinion of Partch as a composer.
Neil said something to the effect that Harry Partch
was a genius "in a certain way," but that he didn't
find Partch to be a great composer.
Having heard a fair amount of Partch's music, it's
clear to me that Partch is at the very least a first-
rate composer.  Whether you want to call him "great"
probably depends on the judgement of future 
generations...but in my opinion it's safe to say that if
*any* of the composers of the 20th century should be
called "great," Partch certainly should.
"Daphne of the Dunes" sends shivers down my spine. It's
just that good.  The intricate cross-rhythms and the
adroit use of timbre and small vs. large just intervals
seem to me astonishingly adept.
"Two Pieces On Ancient Greek Scales" is one of Partch's
most widely recorded compositions, and it seems to me
in every way the equivalent of Bach's best two-part
Inventions.
"And On the Seventh Day, the Petals Fell In Petaluma..." 
has always struck me as a virtuoso display of compositional
ability,  right up there with Josquin DesPres and Johannes
Ockeghem.  Remember that Partch composed "Petals" so that
some of the duets overlapped into quartets...doing this with
a string quartet or a wind quintet is challenging enough, but
to do it *by yourself* using *only two tape recorders* in a JI
tuning which no one else had ever heard before, and to make
it work musically...well, this is an achievement that leaves
me speechless.
Partch was obviously a genius. In my judgment he was also
a great composer.  
This is just one person's opinion, but it seems to me that Neil
hasn't fully appreciated the beauty and the power of Partch's
music.
On the other hand, let me point out that this says nothing about
Neil Haverstick's judgement.  Neil's compositional style is 
*very* different from the academic "serious" so-called
"highbrow" compositional style with which many of the
academic subscribers to this forum are most familiar.
Neil is an excellent composer, however.  Oddly enough, many
of Neil's pieces tend in the direction of what the French
call "spectral composition," a new music movement that
doesn't have its own name in this country (but does have
some brilliant exponents, foremost among them William
Sethares).
Neil's use of the guitar with heavy signal processing has
influenced me in my recent use of guitars as "resonant
bodies" with extreme signal processing.  By beating the
back of the guitar with a rubber mallet, placing knitting
needles between the strings, and running various objects
along the strings (paper, tin foil, picks, felt sticks) while
subjecting the signal to extravagant signal processing
with a reverb unit, remarkable and almost orchestral
sounds can be obtained from almost any guitar.
Neil's work with guitars particularly in 34/oct pointed
the way for us (Adam Cline has done a lot of work with
prepared guitars at the Sonic Arts Gallery), and serves
as a continual inspiration.
Perhaps Neil comes from such a different mindset
to Partch's that it's difficult for Neil to fully appreciate
Partch's music.
--mclaren


Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Sun, 23 Jun 1996 18:34 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id JAA06488; Sun, 23 Jun 1996 09:33:58 -0700
Date: Sun, 23 Jun 1996 09:33:58 -0700
Message-Id: <Pine.SCO.3.91.960623093010.10610A-100000@delta1.deltanet.com>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu