source file: m1514.txt
Date: Tue, 25 Aug 1998 16:58:13 +0000

Subject: 21st Century Orchestral Instruments

From: "Patrick Ozzard-Low" <patrick.ozzard-low.itex@norfolk.gov.uk>

Dear Tuning,

As I think most of you are aware,  over the last year or so I have 
been writing a discussion paper entitled: 

                21st Century Orchestral Instruments 
        Acoustic instruments for Alternative Tuning Systems

At last, a version of this is now complete. 

The paper is aimed at a wide range of people and organisations:  
instrument makers and manufacturers, composers, performers, 
acousticians and technologists.  

I have also won a Winston Churchill Fellowship to travel in the USA 
and Europe for 10 week to research this further.  My (current) 
itinerary in the USA is New York, Boston, Chicago, Madison, SF, LA, 
and San Diego, and Lafayette (Louisiana) (not necessarily in that 
exact order). This will run from about 5th October to early 
November. 

In Europe the trip will take in various cities in France, Germany 
and Holland - and I am still trying to establish further 
contacts.  This will be mid November to mid December.  

The purpose of the trip is to discuss new ideas for acoustic 
instruments with instrument makers and manufacturers;  and to discuss 
whether contemporary musicians support the idea that the 'classical 
instrumentarium' would benefit from new acoustic (or adapted versions 
etc) as well as new electronic instruments.  It would seem that if 
there is adquate consensus on this then there would be considerable 
value in establishing a 'network' of interested contributors in 
various different fields - and a 'Centre' or group of centres to 
co-ordinate research and development. 

Unfortunately my plans for this trip are running very much behind
schedule, partly due to the difficulties of writing the paper while 
doing a full-time job, partly due to family problems.  (For a long 
time I thought I would have to cancel the trip and abandon the 
grant...) 

I would enjoy meeting as many people on the trip as possible - from 
each of the areas listed (composers, performers, instrument makers 
etc).  Even at this late stage, I would still be very grateful if any 
of you can me in touch with open minded acoustic instsument makers 
and others who might be interested - especially in Europe, where I 
have had less luck in making a large number of constructive contacts. 
 (Due to time limits - email addresses and telephone numbers, where 
possible, would be extremely helpful: they will be treated in 
complete confidence). 

I am hoping to create as soon as possible the simplest webpage 
so the discussion paper can be downloaded easily, and everyone can 
have alook at it.  

20 hardcopies of the paper are due to be printed tomorrow, and I will 
mail these to folks who have been especially helpful over the last 
year.  Unfortunately I cannot send free hardcopies to everyone 
because of the cost.  However, I will certainly create bound 
hardcopies on request for anyone who wants one, if they will 
contribute something toward the cost of printing, binding and 
postage.   The text is about 180 pages including appendices;  each 
copy currently costs about 9-12 pounds sterling to produce and send 
(depending where you are).   I'm trying to find ways of reducing the 
cost, and will be mailing reduced versions of the text to individuals 
at various universities and research  institutues in the hope of 
generating general interest.     

Please note that the 'tuning theory' element of the paper is 
introductory;   similarly, the paper does not go into the real 
nitty-gritty of acoustics.  I am a composer (and pianist), not a 
tuning theorist, instrument maker, or acoustician.  I have written 
the paper from a 'generalist's' viewpoint in the hope of interesting 
a broader audience in the subject of alternative tunings.  It is also 
written from the point of view that the instruments of the orchestra 
(obviously not their technique) have more or less ossified since the 
late 1800's, and from the position that electronic musical 
instruments are unlikely to 'replace' acoustic instruments in the 
near future.   Therefore, it would seem that there would be much 
value in directing a proportion of public funding for musical 
instrument research toward acoustic as well as electronic research 
domain.  (Well, it's not quite a simple as that, of course...)

The major theme of the paper is the implications of alternative 
tuning systems (ATS) for future acoustic instrumental innovation.

If it you would like to meet me on the trip, or can suggest others to 
meet, instruments to view, concerts to go to, institutes at which 
to present a seminar, museums holding instruments of special 
interest.... I would be very grateful if you would contact me as soon 
as possible. Please respond to: 

******** pol@c21-orch-instrs.demon.co.uk ***********

(NOT the address I am writing from). 

I should also mention that London Guildhall University has 
expressed interest in hosting the project in a  'Centre for New 
Musical Instruments'.   This is very preliminary, and little 
as yet has happened in this respect.

My sincere thanks go to all those on the list who have helped, 
cajoled, and criticised.....  Your help, and the daily reminder that 
there are many on this list who know much more than I about many 
aspects of these subjects...  has helped to focus the paper 
considerably. 

Patrick Ozzard-Low, Alternative Tuning Projects, UK
pol@c21-orch-instrs.demon.co.uk 
Tel: (44) - 01603 - 614380

Last thought: if it would be at all useful to send small portions 
of the paper to the list - say on a weekly basis... please let me 
know.  I certainly don't want to flood the list with what is 
merely one aspect of this vast subject.  My plan to create a forum 
specifically about new _instruments_  for ATS is as yet still in 
abeyance...