source file: mills2.txt
Date: Fri, 2 Feb 1996 09:57:52 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: A saga of low cunning and
feral persistence
---
As a chronically unrepentant electronics
gonzo, permit me a small confession:
Yes, I finally built myself a duplicate of
Harry Partch's Harmonic Canon I (minus
Harry's bad design features).
And it sounds INCREDIBLE.
Johnny Reinhard has roundly chided me
for slighting acoustic music.  Of course,
he's right.  
In the end, there's no substitute for live
acoustic music played by good performers
on real acoustic instruments.  The richness
and subtlety of the sound is nonpareil.
On the other hand, some of us are interested
in exploring worlds of timbre and massed
sonority which would not be possible to
realize (xenharmonically, anyway) without
the aid of "pushing a button on electronic
boxes." 
Thus circumstances will doubtless force
me to continue "pushing buttons." If you
can get together a 100-piece orchestra
that can play accurately in 15-TET, though,
Johnny, let me know.  In that case my
computer will definitely be mothballed. 
:-)
The Harmonic Canon is a marvel, though. A
universe of subtle & gorgeous xenharmonies
lie within its bridges and pinblocks.
For example, entirely different timbres can
be gotten by stroking the strings with one's
fingers; by plucking them with guitar picks;
by tapping them with a knitting needle; by
thumping them with a piece of a piano action
(Harry gets his revenge against the piano--
50 years late!); and by whanging the strings
with a soft paint roller.
Moreover, non-Partchian string-bending
koto-style performance techniques
bring out an entirely different side
of the instrument.
The great virtue of the Harmonic Canon
lies in its potential as a kind of mechanical
sequencer.  You set up various justly-intoned
melodies by moving the many independent
bridges, and you can get triplets, repeated
notes, single notes, entire melodic chains
playing at a rate entirely controlled by
the rate at which you move your finger or
your pick across the strings.  Add to this
the potential gestural effects--pitch-bent
ji chords, for instance, or dissonant clusters
obtained by rapidly brushing groups of
strings--and a single player has got a
whole galaxy of microtonal sounds at
hi/r beck and call.
Harry called this instrument his "blank
canvas," and after playing it for a while it's
easy to see why.  He also mentioned that
placing the bridges was almost as much of 
an art as playing the instrument--another 
truism which becomes even clearer with
personal experience in sliding 37-odd 
bridges around.
The Harmonic Canon is to my mind the most
impressive of Partch's instruments.  It's one
of the few that can't be approximated by a sampler
or a DX7.  To everyone who's interested in
composing acoustic xenharmonic music, my first
suggestion wuold be: build a Harmonic Canon I.
Costs less than $100, and it'll open your
ears to a new cosmos of xenharmonic
harmonies and melodies.
To construct one, follow the plans in Harry's
Genesis Of A Music--sans the bad design ideas.
N.B.: Harry's bad design ideas were 1) Using
guitar tuning gears; 2) using glued wooden
pegs to anchor the guitar strings on the
other pinblock; 3) sliding that wacky plexiglas
pitch-bender under the strings.
Instead of tacking triangular wooden tongues
onto the end of the left-hand pinblock and 
then mounting guitar tuning gears on 'em,
just anchor 44 piano tuning pins directly in the
left-hand pinblock.  It works fine.  The problem
with the wooden tongues is that they will
inevitably crack under all the tension from
those 44 guitar strings--Harry himself had
to bolt metal supports under the wooden
tongues to keep 'em from splitting off
entirely.  Moreover, the guitar tuning gears
never stay in tune long.  So the blasted original
Partch-design Harmonic Canon was *always*
going out of tune during performances.
By contrast, our Harmonic Canon stays in
tuen for days at a time and can support
a much higher tension--thus the sound is
louder, and the plucked or struck guitar 
strings will ring much  longer than Harry's 
strings did.
Also: avoid the wooden pegs.  Bad idea.
Instead, use 1/4" machine screws on the 
right-hand pinblock.  (Make sure both
pinblocks are hardened rock maple.) 
Under the screws, settle 5/16" washers.
Between the screws and washers thread the
guitar string, and voila!  The brass loop end
of the guitar string will automatically catch
tight when you sink the screws with a screwdriver.
This was Bill Wesley's inspiration, and it's
infinitely simpler and less trouble-prone than
Partch's original design.
Q: What did Partch do when he went surfing?
A: He used to "hang eleven."
--mclaren


Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 2 Feb 1996 19:01 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id KAA16240; Fri, 2 Feb 1996 10:01:20 -0800
Date: Fri, 2 Feb 1996 10:01:20 -0800
Message-Id: <0099D528F3AA41A5.9363@ezh.nl>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu