source file: mills2.txt
Date: Tue, 16 Jul 1996 07:27:30 -0700

Subject: Post from McLaren

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

From: mclaren
Subject: Paul Erlich's points about inharmonic
 tone complexes - post 1 of 2
--
John Chalmers informs me that some folks
object to the idea of matching inharmonic 
timbres to inharmonically-derived tunings.
Apparently, your contention is that the
inharmonic tone complexes tones will be heard
as having a virtual pitch entirely different
from that of their component inharmonic
partials.  Paul Erlich seems typical in
these respects.
On the surface, this sounds like a good
argument.  More: Erlich apparently claims
that  inharmonic tone complex will fail
to exhibit spectral fusion and will fall apart
into a set of discrete partials if they're highly
inharmonic.  Thus it would seem pointless
to attempt to match a non-just non-equal-
tempered tuning to a n-j n-e-t timbre, since
the resultant inharmonic timbre will never
be heard as having a fundamental pitch
related to the pitches of the n-j n-e-t scale
from which it is drawn.
Is this claim correct?
It turns out that it isn't.
Paul Erlich strikes me as a smart fellow with
some knowledge of acoustics and pyschoacoustics.
Alas, as a newly-minted graduate much of Paul's
knowledge is book learning only.   And, as it turns
out, much of what has been written about complexes
of inharmonic tones is either wrong, irrelevant
to xenharmonic composition, or the result of 
peculiar and non-musical experimental conditions.
This issue is important.  James Dashow, Jean-Claude
Risset, William Sethares, myself, and a number of
other composers have produced a substantial body
of compositional work in which non-just non-equal-
tempered timbres and tunings are used.  If Paul's
claims (and some of the available psychoacoustic
literature about inharmonic tones) are correct,
then the theoretical and musical justification for
much of this compositional work collapses.
As will be seen, however, there is a great deal
of evidence *against* Paul Erlich's view, and
many of the psychoacoustic papers which purport
to "prove" that inharmonic tone complexes do not
audibly fuse are lethally flawed.
Let us begin with the alleged evidence *against* the 
coherent audibility of inharmonic tone complexes:
Rayleigh, in his 1876 2-volume text "Acoustics," points
out that the fundamental pitch of orchestral timpani
is a frequency not present in the partials produced
by this instrument.  Rayleigh explained this by
pointing out that the ear hears some of the upper
partials of timpani as belonging to a fragment of
an harmonic series; the ear extrapolates from
this harmonic-series fragment a lower pitch
which is heard as the fundamental though not
physically present.  Other partials, which are
physically present, are heard as "hum" notes
which do not contribute to the sense of musical
pitch of the note.
Rayleigh noted the same phenomenon with regard
to bells: here again, the lowest several inharmonic
partials are heard as "hum" notes, but do not make
musical contribution to the sense of pitch of
the bell.
65 years later Schouten demonstrated in
an elegant experiment that the human ear often
heard a fundamental pitch not physically present in
a musical sound.  "He had constructed a sort
of optical siren (Figure 6-4) by means of which
he could produce sounds with various waveforms.
Using this, he produced sounds with harmonically
related partials. (..) Then, by proper adjustments,
he could cancel out the fundamental frequency...
I could hear this fundamental frequency come and
go, but the pitch of the sound did not change at 
all.  In some way, my ear inferred the proper 
pitch form the harmonics..." [Pierce, J. R., "The
Science of Musical Sound," 2nd ed., 1992, pg. 92]
The paper "Pitch of the residue," by J. F. Schouten,
R. J. Ritsma and B. L. Cardozo, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
Vol. 34, pp. 1418-1424, 1962, presents these
results concisely. "Whenever a sound consists
of a small number of frequencies, spaced
sufficiently widely, subjective sound analysis
allows us to hear each Fourier component as a
separate pure tone with corresponding pitch
(Ohm's acoustical law).  If, however, the
frequencies are narrowly spaced, the ear
fails partly or completely to analyze the
Fourier components into corresponding pure
tones and, instead, hears one single percept
of sharp timbre.  If, moreover, the frequencies
are harmonics of one fundamental frequency,
the percept may have a decidedly low pitch."
[Schouten, J. R., J. Ritsman, B. Lopes Cardozo,
"Pitch of the Residue," J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
Vol. 34, No. 8, September 1962, pg. 1418.]
Schouten et al. go on to point out that "The
phenomenon of the reside necessarily leads
to a hypothetical pitch extractor different
from and subsequent to the analyzer. As a
consequence of the pitch shifts, the operation
of the pitch extraction in the frequency
domain is highly improbable. Therefore, the
hypothetical pitch extractor probably 
operates in the time domain (e.g., with
delay-line tehcniques)." [ibid., pg. 1424]
Further evidence for the existence of
periodicity (or "virtual") pitch is found
in "Periodicity Pitch for Interrupted White
Noise--Fact or Artifact?" by Irwin Pollack,
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol 45, no. 1, 1969,
pp. 237-238.  The author concludes that
switching transients cannot provide a
reasonable explanation for the perceived
ability of listeners to accurately match
the pitch of the interrupted noise despite
the fact that "The long-term spectrum of 
an interrupted white noise shows no 
sepctral peaks at the frequency of 
interruption."  Consequently "The results,
therefore, suggest that the periodicity pitch
of interrupted noise is factual, no artifactual."
[Ibid., pg. 238]
The book "Frequency Analysis and Periodicity
Detection in Hearing," ed. R. Plomp and G. F.
SMoorenburg, A. W. Sithoff, Leiden, 1970,
adduced further evidence in favor of virtual
pitch as the primary pitch extractor in the
human auditory system. Franz Bilsen 
concludes "The perceptual similarity between
a sound with its repetition and a pure periodic
signal can be represented in a general model
for the perceptibility of pitch and timbre. Like
the explanation of repteition pitch, time 
separation pitch, and peridocity pitch, the model
finds its description in the time domain." [Bilsen,
F., "Repetition Pitch: Its Implications for Hearing
Theory and Room Acoustics," Frequency Analysis
and Periodicity Detection In Hearing--Ed. R. Plomp
and G. F. SMoorenburg, A. W. Sithoff, Leiden, 1970,
pp. 291-299]
Schouten himself points that the earlier (Helmholtz)
explanation of fundamental perception by nonlinear
production of difference tones between higher 
harmonics fails: "The case of the missing fundamental
was solved for the time being (the 1860s-1920s)
by a modelmaker's brainwave that the nonlinearity 
of the ear could produce the missing fundamental as
a difference tone between the higher harmonics. Both
Fletcher (1929) and von Bekesy (1934), now as
observers, proved this point by the method of best 
beats. Sadly enough, the method of best beats is
unreliable unless one knows "who beats whom."
(..) In a way the discovery of the residue confirmed 
Seebeck's "wider interpretation" that the high 
harmonics might contribute somehow to the 
fundamental tone, except that it is not the
fundamental tone itself which is enhanced but a
different subject component: the residue.
"As a modelmaker, the author (Schouten) ascribed
the low pitch of the residue to the *period* in the 
time pattern of the joint harmonics striking a
particular area of the basilar membrane (Schouten,
1940s). This amounted to a revival of many older
assumptions, except that the initial quasi-Fourier
analysis was left standing in full glory.
"If a set of harmonics is shifted collectively over
a small distance in the frequency scale, the pitch
of the residue shifts *in proportion* to the 
constituent frequencies (Schouten, 1940c). This
crucial experiment (now called the first effect
of pitch shift) kills two birds with one stone. It
implies that pitch is determined neither by the
*spacing* of the harmonics, nor by the *time*
envelope of the wave pattern since both remain 
invariant.  Hence, in the realm of modelmaking, 
it must be anouther form of periodicity detection
in the time domain.  This notion goes back to some
etent to Seebeck's (1844a) idea of 'the periodic
recurrence of an equal or similar state of movement'
and to Hermann's (1912) 'intermittence tones.'"
[Schouten, J., "The Residue Revisited," Frequency
Analysis and Periodicity Detection in Hearing, Ed.
R. Plomp and G. F. Smoorenburg, A. W. Sithoff, 
Leiden, 1970, pp. 41-58]
These papers provided apparently convincing
proof of the residue's primacy in determining
perceived pitch.  Such was the power of the
residue pitch hypothesis that, from the late
 1960s to the present, Ernst Terhardt
produced an influential series of papers based
on his model of virtual pitch detection: "Zur
Tonho"henwarnehmung von Kla"ngen I. 
Psykoakustische Grundlagen" [Concerning the
perceived pitch height of sounds: I. Psychoacoustic
Foundations]" Acustica, Vol. 26, No. 4, 1972, pp. 
175-186] and "Zur Tonho"henwarnehmung von 
Kla"ngen II. Ein Funktionschema," Acustica,
Vol. 26, No. 4.,  [Concerning the perceived pitch
height of sounds: II. A functional model].
Terhardt's theory essentially relegates the
residue or "virtual" pitch to the role of a
"secondary sensation," ascribing the primary
mechanism of pitch detetction to the well-worn
place theory, which accords the operation of
the basilar membrane primacy in determining
pitch. "The pitch of simple tones and the
"residue" pitch of complex tones exhibit quite
different properties. The pitch of simple tones
may be xplained by the principles of the 'classical'
place theory. The 'residue' pitch is closely related 
to the pure tone pitches of partials. It is
concluded that the 'residue' pitch may be regarded
as a 'seondary sensation,' derived from the pure
tone pitches of dominant partials." [Terhardt, E.,
op. cit., pg. 174]
Terhardt went on publish a series of papers in
which he elaborated the "residue" pitch as a 
secondary sensation: "Pitch consonacne, and
harmony," J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 1974, Vol. 55, 
pp. 1061-1069; "On the perception of periodoic 
slund fluctations (roughenss)," Acustica, 1974,
vol. 30, pp. 201-213. "Ein psychoakusitche 
begru"ndetes Konzept der Kusikalisches 
Konsonanz," Acustica, 1976, Vol. 36, pp. 121-
137, "The two-component theory of musical 
consonance, in "Psychophysics and physiology
of hearing," ed. E. F. Evans & J. P. Wilson,
London: Academic press, 1977; "Psychoacoustic
evaluation of musical sounds," Perception &
Psychophysics, Vol. 23, pp. 483-492;  "Algorithm
for extraction of pitch and pitch salience from
complex tonal signals," J. Acoust. Soc. Am.,
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 71, No. 3, March 1982,
pp. 679-688; Terhardt, E., Stoll, G. and Seewann,
M., "Pitch of complex signals according to virtual-
pitch theory: tests, examples, and predictions,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. Vol. 71, pp. 671-678, 1982.
This would all seem to be very convincing. 
Clearly Erlich *must* be correct...right?
Inharmonic tones complexes exhibit either
a virtual pitch which has nothing to do with
the frequencies of their component partials,
or the inharmonic tone simply falls apart and
fails to fuse into a single acoustic percept...
don't they?
As it turns out, not so.
The first cracks in apparently impregnable 
facade of the residue pitch hypothesis began
to appear during de Boer's research. In 1976, 
de Boer's monumental study (he calls it "a
textbook inside a book") of the residue pitch
defined the field: "On the 'Residue' and Auditory Pitch
Perception," in Handbook of Sensory Physiology,
Volume 5, No. 3, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-
New York, 1976, pp. 481-583]
This survey of the residue pitch phenomenon drew
on de Boer's doctoral dissertation and provided an
unparalleled overview: from Seebeck's acoustic
siren to Schouten's and Ritsma's work, to the
evidence from chopped noise (Pollock, op. cit.),
to Smoorenburg's own work.
Here, however, doubt begins to creep in about
the universal validity of the residue hypothesis
as the basis of pitch detection. "Must we say
goodbye to the 'residue'? We might be inclined
to say: yes. In the course of this treatise, we
witnessed the gradual change of meaning of
tjhe term 'resideu,' a change that finally led
to a new and less restrictive definition (see e.g.,
Section E. 10). At the same time the musical
aspects of 'residue pitch' grew more and more 
important. (..) What is also new is the
ambiguity involved in residue pitch. This was 
recognized rather reluctantly at first (Section 
E. 6); later, it was considered an essential feature
of the mechanism (Section E 14). How essential
it is did not become completely clear before the
work on two-tone complexes and musical intervals
(Section H. 2). In last instance, even the harmonic
number n of the lower partial appeared to be
esentially ambiguous (Section H. 6). The ambiguity
involves one other concept that is, in the opinion of
the present reviewer, of the greatest importance. (..)
When we listen to a sound, we do not perceive this or 
that aspect of the sound all the time; what we perceive
depends completely on our training. (..) Hence,
the fact that the result of a particular experiment 
turns out to be extremely clear-cut does not 
necessarily imply that ever naive listener is able 
to perceive the signals in the same way. It is not too 
difficult to associate a residue pitch with a two-
tone complex presented monaurally. But to do the 
same with a two-tone complex presented dichotically
is quite anotehr matter. (..) We may conclude that we
must be extremely cautious in our conclusions."
[de Boer, E., "On the 'Residue' and Auditory Pitch
Perception," Handbook of Sensory Physiology, Vol. 5,
No. 3, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1976, pp. 572-574]
R. J. Ritsma admits as much when he points out
"The pitch behaviour of inharmonic complexes cannot
be described precisely by P = f/n or by the concept
of subharmonics of a dominant frequency
component predicting a pitch P according to equation
1. " [Ritsma, R. J., "Periodicity Detection," in 
Frequency Analysis and Periodicity Detection in 
Hearing, ed. R. Plomp and G. F. Smoorenburg, A. W. 
Sithoff, Leiden, 1970, pp. 251-266]
Further doubts about the validity of the results
of tests on residue pitch were created by Elizabeth
Cohen's and Mathews' and Pierce's work in the
late 1970s and early 1908s.
"In fact, in single tones stretched A = 2.4, one
tended to hear the partials as separated sounds
rather than as fused into a tone of a single
pitch. We believe that such fusion depends on
the phenomenon of residue or periodicity pitch. 
This has been noted by Cohen. She has observed
further than the degree of fusion of a stretched
tone depends on the envelope of the tone, and is
greatest for an exponentially decreasing amplitude 
which gives a 'struck' quality." [Mathews, M., and
Pierce, J. R., "Harmony and Inhamonic Partials,"
Rapports IRCAM No. 28, 1980, pg. 12]
These results are at first glance mixed: some
of Mathews and Pierce's results appear to 
support the residue pitch hypothesis, while
other results--the fact that inharmonic sounds
*can* be made to fuse with the right amplitude
envelope--tend to contravene Erlich's claim.
However, further on the paper strikes a profound
blow to the residue hypothesis:
"Subjects can identify keys of both stretched
and unstretched matierals in an XMXMt test."
The significance of this fact should not be
underestimated.
"If we can detect 'keys' and some form of finality
within a cadence or progressions within inharmonic
tones, then some of the theories of harmony in the
past must not have been as cogent as some of
their proponents have thought them to be."
[Roads, C., "An Interview WIth Max Mathews,"
Computer Music Journal, Vol. 4, No. 4, 1980,
pp. 21-22]
It is impossible to explain key sense and
a sense of finality in harmonic progressions
using inharmonic tones with the residue
pitch hypothesis.  Clearly, other auditory
mechanisms must be at work.
This should not be surprising: many other
researchers have run into a brick wall when
they tried to explain all ear/brain phenomena
on the basis of a single proposed mechanism
of pitch detection.
Elizabeth Cohen found similarly mixed results,
and raised even further doubts about the purported
"uselessness" of inharmonic tones for harmony
in her series of experiments.
For one thing, Cohen notes that "Throughout 
history musical isntrument ave included not 
only sources with integral multiple partials
but also thouse sources with inharmonic partials.
Examples of the latter are stiff strings, bars,
and bells. (..) We already possess convincing 
musical examples illustrating that sources with
inharmonic partials have musical potential
outside the confines of western harmony. The
musical legacy of the Balinese gamelan is an
outstanding example. In addition, recent
compositions such as Inharmonique (Jean Claude
Risset) and Stria (John Chowning) have
demonstrated that inharmonic materials can
render musical ideas with exquisite sensitivity
within a more "western" context." [COhen, E.,
"Some Effects of Inharmonic Partials On
Interval Perpcetion," Music Perception, VOl. 
1, No. 3, Spring 1984, pp. 323-349]
Cohen searched for a mechanism which could
explain why "Inharmonic tones are not 
conventionally part of the infra-structure
of western harmony, but may be used in
the same manner as harmonic tones 
under certain conditions." 
Cohen notes that a number of her test
subjects had no difficulty perceiving
harmonic progressions in inharmonic
tones, and perceives as "octaves" intervals
far from the 2:1..."Subject GWM shows no
desire to cling to an octave based on a
learned or innate preference for a physical
ratio of 2:1." [op. cit., pg. 337]
She found similar results for inharmonic
"fifths": "The data suggests that GWM, JWG
and JMS tune by matching partials."
Cohen concludes that "The nature of an
instrument having noninteger partials suggests
a need to develop an interval sense on something
other than simple integer ratios or fundamental
doubling.  It is suggested here that GWM relied
on an interval sense that was based on 
recognizing the consonance determined by
coincident partials and associating this 
sound as a particular interval."
Cohen further points out that "If the composer
fuses the sound by controlling the temporal
evolution of the partials, then the composer 
can be assured that conventional relationships
and impressions can be made to hold. If the
composer wishes to exploit the inharmonicity
of the stretched tones, yet maintain certain
consonance relations, then the knowledge
that interaction of the partials can successfully 
determine interval size will surely be a useful
tool." [op. cit., pg. 347]
This would appear to strike the death blow for
Paul Erlich's argument.
We are now in a position to see why earlier
experiments with inharmonic tones failed to
produce a sense of spectral fusion, and why
earlier experiments (pre-1970s) with
inharmonic tones usually exhibited a residue
pitch unrelated to the frequencies of the
partials:
[1] Early experiments with inharmonic tones
used crude analog electronic tone production
circuits which generated a set of unrelated
iharmonic partials.  Typically, FM or AM
was used, or digital counter circuits.
By contrast, the use of digital computers 
to generate inharmonic tone-complexes in
the 1970s allowed researchers to generate
inharmonic tones all of whose partials were
related.  Clearly this had a profound audible
effect on test subjects.
[2] Early experiments used extremely "electronc-
sounding" lifeless inharmonic tones with very
simple amplitude envelopes.  As John Chowning
has pointed out (and as can be heard clearly
in his composition Phone), even perfectly 
harmonic sounds often fail to fuse into
a single percept if the envelopes of the 
different partials do not share a common
vibrato and tremolo.  The effect can be 
vividly heard in Chowning's composition:
a set of partials appears from silence and
while harmonic, sounds like an unrelated set
of partials: but when each partials slowly
begins to exhibit common vibrato, the 
set of "unrelated" tones gradually fuse into
the unified percept of a human voice.
The same effect was clearly at work in
early experiments with inharmonic tones.
Later experiments, like Cohen's, use
common amplitude and frequency
information "built into" the envelopes
of each inharmonic partial to encourage
the tones to audibly fuse--and experiments
from the 1970s onward show that such
inharmonic tones, so modified, do indeed fuse.
[3] Early experiments with inharmonic tones
use arbitrarily stretched partials.  Later,
more sophisticated experiments, (as we
shall see) use sets of partials which 
exhibit the properties of an "inharmonic
series" of tones which are related to some
coherent generating method.  The ear can
hear this and places the inharmonic partials
within the inharmonic series, producing
a complete and convincing sense of finality
in inharmonic cadences.
As the final nail in the coffin of Terhardt's
apparently all-embracing theory, note the
article "Reivsion of Terhardt's Psychoacoustical
Model of the Root(s) Of a Musical Chord," R.
Parncutt, Music Perception, Vol. 6, No. 1, Fall 
1988, pp. 65-94:
"The predictions of Terhardt's octave-
generalized model of the root of a musical
chord occasionally disagree with music theory
(notably, in the case of the minor triad.)"
Thus Terhardt's theory (like so many others
which purported to give 'all the answers'
about how the ear hears) is now crumbling,
and various desperate attempts are being
made to shore it up. 
This tells us (as we should have known all along)
that the ear uses more than the virtual
pitch mechanism to ascertain fundamental
pitch of real-world musical sounds. It also
tells us that the operation of the ear is complex
and context-sensitive, and that therefore an
inharmonic tone progression which offers the
ear alternate cues can and often will be heard
as an inharmonic progression within a coherent
yet inharmonic series of timbres.
The second and final post in this series will
discuss the overwhelming evidence *against*
Erlich's claim, and *in favor of* the ability of even
the most naive listener to hear inharmonic
progressions of inharmonic tones as
exhibiting a sense of harmonic closure,
and a fundamental pitch related to the
fundamental of the inharmonic tone complex..
Ideas fundamental to the extension of microtonality
into the realm of timbre.
--mclaren


Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Tue, 16 Jul 1996 16:31 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id HAA00444; Tue, 16 Jul 1996 07:30:58 -0700
Date: Tue, 16 Jul 1996 07:30:58 -0700
Message-Id: <Pine.SUN.3.91.960716072806.7804F-100000@garcia.efn.org>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu