source file: mills2.txt
Date: Wed, 25 Oct 1995 10:38:45 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Live xenharmonic recording
---
As more and more of you get together and
produce live microtonal music (whether with MIDI
instruments, acoustic instruments, or
a combination of the two), sooner or 
later you'll want to record your xenharmonic
performances on DAT.
Here are the fruits of my experience in
recording live to DAT:
[1] The first thing to remember is that 
whenever a "pro" is involved, the recording
will be crap.  
In my experience "professional sound 
engineer" is a code phrase that actually
means "incompetent toad."  Most of these
people are ex-stereo salesmen who wouldn't
know a balanced line from their own bum.
Among the examples of expertise I've seen
demonstrated by "pro recording engineers:"
using ordinary drugstore rubbing alcohol to
clean the heads of a 16-track tape deck; 
using a Calrec soundfield microphone to
zero in on someone snapping a rubber band
while 5 other xenharmonic instruments were
playing live; accidentally forgetting to
record one of the tracks of a critical stereo
master during a live take; and clipping most
of a digital recording. 
This last is worth a mention or two.  One of
the hallmarks of a "professional" recording
is that the digital audio clips a lot. A WHOLE lot.
Fortunately, all these problems can be
eliminated very simply: if there's a "pro"
involved in the recording process, get rid
of him. (It's always a him. Women don't
seem to be able to plumb such Stygian
depths of ineptitude.)
Do the recording yourself.  The results will
be *infinitely* superior.
[2] The first problem you'll encounter is
the ground loop.  This is a pesky 60 Hz hum that
can drive you out of your mind.  It's caused
by two grounds at slightly different
potentials; 60 Hz wall current flows between
the 2 grounds, producing an audible buzz.
Ground loops can arise at many points in the
audio chain.  The 1st and most obvious place is 
the wall socket.  In this case, 2 different
pieces of audio equipment are hooked together 
electrically (say, a synth plugged into a mixer)
but plugged into 2 different wall sockets.
A ground loop can occur if the ground
on one wall socket is faulty;  in that case
current will flow from one wall socket to the
other through your equipment (an electrical
signal always seeks the lowest level of
electrical potential).   
Another particularly interesting cause of
ground loop is a connection between your
computer's MIDI port and your synth.  This
is NOT supposed to cause a ground loop
because the MIDI's supposed to be optoisolated;
my best guess is this sometimes occurs because
the metal shell of the MIDI cable is connected 
both to the digital ground of the computer and
the analog and digital grounds of the synth,
causing current to flow twixt the analog
ground of the synth and the computer's
backplane.  In this case you'll also get a
distinctive whining noise--clock noise
from the computer.   
The way to solve all ground problems is with
an isolation transformer.  The Ebtech Hum
Eliminator handles both balanced and 
unbalanced lines and does a good job.  It's
also dirt cheap: < $60 for 2 stereo
channels.  I keep 3 of these on hand at all
times whenever I do live recordings, since
(as usual) if you ask any "pro" for an
isolation transformer, he'll fumble around
like a lobotomized trilobite & come up with a
single mono balanced line version.  (As
always, the "pro" is too inept to realize that
in the real world most synths use stereo
unbalanced line outs.)
If all else fails, you *can* fix ground loop
hum in the mix.  Digitize the audio to your
hard disk, feed .25 seconds of the hum into
the Dolson DNOISE program, then filter
it out of the recording on your hard disk
by running DNOISEwith the Fourier
filter generated by the hum. Warning: this
usually adds considerable reverb, since the
notch filters generated by DNOISE are usually
set at harmonics of 60 Hz, and as we all know
running a bunch of different FFT bins at once
through a soundfile always & unavoidably adds
reverb due to the nature of the short-time FFT.
[3] When live instruments are combined
with synths, it's important that everyone
be able to hear hi/rself.  Often the
live instrumentalist will use outboard
effects and a small speaker to enhance the
sound; thus as a recording engineer you'll
often be faced with the problem of recording
a live instrument with a speaker nearby.
If you feed the output of your recording to
reference speakers so that everyone can
hear what the mix sounds like, you'll 
inadvertently recreate Robert Ashley's classic
electronic music composition "The Werewolf."
The only reliable way to deal with feedback
in my experience is with a feedback 
eliminator.  Turning down the monitor
speakers doesn't work because no one
can hear the total mix; moving the small
speaker back from the mike doesn't work 
because the live performer can't hear 
what hi/r output sounds like.
The Sabine feedback eliminator is in my
experience the best way to deal with the
problem.   Because it's a digital widget,
it's especially effective in killing screech
& howl before it starts.  There are other
feedback eliminators on the market, but
this one is cheaper and does a better job
than anything I've come across.  The cost
is about $250.
Naturally a "pro's" solution to the problem of
feedback is: "Uh, uh, hm, uh, play lower."
Typically useless; typically incompetent.
[3]  When recording to DAT or ADAT, you'll
discover that Robert Fripp's rules of 
recording apply: 
*The SPL level of the group during live
performance will always be at least
twice the level during the sound check.
*The percussionist will always hit the
microphones at some point during the
performance.
*If the monitor speakers are placed close
enough to the performers that they can
hear themselves, there will be feedback;
if the monitor speakers are placed far
enough away from the performers to
avoid feedback, they won't be able to
hear themselves.
*The tape will always run out during the
best part of the performance.
To avoid these inevitable problems,
try the following:
*Set the DAT record level during a
sound check, then back it off by half, then
drop it by another 3 dB.   Most DATs
are actually at -10 dB when they read
0 dB, so this will save your bacon during
really loud sections.  If the sound levels
are generally within recording limits
but momentarily rise by extraordinary
amounts (this can occur with metallophone-
type percussion instruments), add a compressor
between the mixer and the DAT. 
*Place a coincident XY pair of mikes
directly above the percussionist.  Very
few percussionists will try to play
empty air.
*Instead of using monitor speakers, use
headphones for everyone in the group
whenever possible.
[4] Placement of microphones is
critical for live recording.  It differs
with each room, acoustic instrument,
and type of mike.
You might be surprised to learn that
with acoustic instruments, different
frequencies radiate in different directions.
Thus placing a mike front center and 30 
degrees below a cello will pick up one
set of low frequencies, while moving 
the mike to the left or right will pick
up another set of mid-frequencies. This
is one of the reasons why you'll often
need a whole passel of microphones in
different locations around one 
acoustic xenharmonic instrument.
Cardioid condenser mikes should be
placed as close as possible unless
the source is metal bars or tubulongs;
in that case they should be placed at
least 8 feet to 10 feet away.
When miking a guitar, you'll find that
you get more realistic sound if you
aim the mikes slightly away from the
guitar's center hole.  The entire body
of the guitar radiates sound, and for
best results place one mike up by the
fingerboard and another mike down
below the center hole, aimed at the
instrument's body.
The same appears to be true of the cello,
the viola and the violin. In those instruments
the bridge is one of the "hottest" sources
of sound, and a mike moderately distant
from the bridge, aimed at the body of
the instrument, often needs to be balanced
by another close-in mike aimed at another part
of the instrument to get a recording that
sounds like the live instrument.
Again, as noted, to get the "full" sound
of the instrument you may have to combine
the output from a bunch of different mikes
in different positions.  (This is one reason
why so many sampling CDs sound different
from one another; only 2 mikes were used,
and on each CD the mikes were placed in
different positions!  Yes, Virginia, mike
placement is CRITICAL!)
Wind instruments can exhibit sharp
transients, so *always* use a puff filter.  
This can be something as simple as a clean
sock placed over the mike or as elaborate
as a $50 screen from the local music
store.  The acoustic result tends to be
the same.
If you're using PZM mikes, you can 
increase dynamic range by hot-wiring
two 9 volt batteries in parallel.  This
will increase the apparent noise of the
mike, so you'll have to use an additional
hiss elminator between the PZM mike
and the mixer. (More on hiss elimination
in a moment.)
PZM mikes operate unlike other mikes--
they produce the best results if they're
firmly attached to large rigid slabs of wood,
metal or glass.  If possible, bolt the PZM
mike to the floor or the wall! (Warning: if
your recording site is near a street, you'll
pick up low frequencies from traffic through
the wall. A notable problem on recordings
made with PZMs in London, since in London
every recording studio is near a street with traffic.)
The PZM mike also has a peculiar pickup pattern: 
totally hemispherical.  Whereas cardioid mikes
will do an excellent job of rejecting
off-axis sounds, the PZM mike picks up
everything indiscriminately within 180
degrees of its soundfield.  This means
that the PZM mike is suited only
for an extremely quiet recording 
environment.  By contrast, many of
my recordings with condenser mike
make been made in houses over which
jet planes have been flying--yet the
jet plane rumble isn't audible in the
final recording because of the cardioid
condenser's superb rejection of off-
axis sound.
The PZM mike is apt to overload during
high transients.  It should be placed 
farther away than a condenser mike. 
While a condenser mike will suffer
drastic bass rolloff if it's farther than
about 1 foot from the sound source,
a PZM mike (firmly attached to a
rigid plane of wood or metal)  will
exhibit excellent flat frequency 
response at almost any distance.
The Calrec soundfield mike is a special
case.  It's noisy, but 4 of 'em output
to an ADAT will allow you to "zoom"
in after the recording on any of the
corners of an imaginary tetrahedron.
This can actually let you fix some
recording problems in the mix.
[5] Different engineers prefer
different philosophies of mike 
placement.
The 3 most common are the 
coincident XY pair, the binaural 
pair, and the widely separated pair.
Coincident XY produces excellent
results with a group in which everyone
has about the same SPL; the binaural
pair produces remarkable stereo
versimilitude but only if the listener
uses headphones.  The widely separated
pair (or quad, or octet) is useful for
instruments physically distant and with
very different SPLs, but tends to
produce a final recording without
a convincing soundstage.  
In general, the smaller the number of
mikes, the more realistic the soundstage
of the recording. Some of my CDs are reissues
of Mercury Living Presence recordings
made with coincident XY pairs in
1957-1959 and they sound more true
to life than almost any recordings made today.
With instruments which exhibit 
significant sustain (like a psaltery)
you may want to place a  mike
inside the body of the instrument.  If so,
leave the sides open.  Otherwise the
transients will blow the top out of
your mix and force you to record at
such a low level as to produce junk. Mixing
the output with the sound picked up
from 2 nearby mikes can help to
capture the live reverberant sound better
than a pure coincident XY or binaural pair.
It's important to realize that 
microphones are acoustic
cyclopses: they see *only and perfectly*
that tiny bit of the soundfield at
which they're aimed.   To get a
recording that sounds like what your
ears hear at a live performance, you'll
often have to jump through hoops and
use bizarre and irrational mike placements
and mixes.
One of the greatest fallacies in dealing
with microphones is the old canard: "If
your ears can hear it, the mike will
pick it up."  This is NEVER true.
Sounds which are clearly audible to your
ears during a live performance will
invariably be ignored by the mikes;
sounds which your ears cannot hear
during a live performance will be
magnified unbearably by the mikes.
Small changes in mike placement can
produce extreme changes in the 
recording. 
Above all, trust your ears by listening
to the test recordings on your DAT:
if the test recording doesn't sound
like the live performance, change
things--no matter how conceptually
perfect your mike placement or
mix levels.
[6] All live recordings have hiss.
Digital microphones, digital mixers,
digital synths, digital recorders--
doesn't matter.  There will STILL be
hiss.
In my experience the biggest source
of frying bacon is the effects unit.
Even if it's a 24-bit reverb, it will
hiss like crazy.  The only solution to
this is to put a hiss eliminator on 
the effects unit BEFORE the stereo
returns come back into the mixer.
There are a lot of models of hiss
eliminator on the market.  They all
work on the same principle: a
level-sensing circuit activates
a voltage-controlled filter which
closes down depending on the
sensitivity setting.
The Hush IIcx is fairly cheap and
works well; a used KLH Burwen
Dynamic Noise Reduction unit
will also work well; dbx makes
(or used to make) a single-ended
noise reduction unit that worked
well; and other companies make
similar widgets.  They're all in
the range of $150-$200. 
You'll need at least 2 of these 
for any recording session. 1 to
kill the hiss from the effects
unit(s) coming into the mixer,
another to kill the hiss after
it leaves the mixes and goes
into your DAT or ADAT.
[7]  Fripp's rule of thumb that
the tape always runs out during
the best part of the performance
can be easily end-run.  I always
record with 2 digital recorders--
one recording live from mikes,
another recording the straight
mix output from the mixer.  As
Warren Burt can testify, this
approach works--what one 
recording misses, the other
gets.  Starting one machine
later than the other assures that
you'll never be burned by 
lack of tape.
[7] "Pro" engineers will place great
stock in balanced vs. unbalanced
lines.  In my experience balanced
lines are useful mainly in running
audio cables from the mixer to
the DAT.  As long as your other cable
runs are short & you're not recording
next to a microwave relay tower or
a commercial radio tower, there's
no practical advantage in using balanced
lines. (Unless the stage is a long ways
away from the mixing console! A cable run
of more than 15 or 20 feets demands a balanced
line, no question.) 
"Pro" engineers will claim that balanced
lines eliminate ground loops.  Naturally,
this isn't true.  Balanced lines are just
as prone to ground loops as unbalanced
lines when the digital grounds of digital
synths are involved.  The sad fact is that
you'll still need isolation transformers
even if you use balanced lines on all
of your equipment. One further point:
if at any point in the audio chain you
introduce an unbalanced line, the whole
audio chain might as well be unbalanced.
A single unbalanced line can (& usually 
will) introduce a ground loop.  Bear in
mind that the unbalanced part of the
audio loop can be inside a wall socket 
with 3 holes but no true ground!
So much for the myth that "balanced lines
eliminate ground loops."
[8] You should bring along your own
speakers, your own preamp, your own
surge suppressor, your own power strips
and your own line conditioner/backup UPS
to any public recording session.  Last year
I had the delightful opportunity to handle
audio on a live performance in which
the "pro" sound engineer in charge thought
it would be a real smart idea to let
20 people plug coffee machines and hot
plates and toaster ovens into the same
outlet the performers were using to
power their digital synths.
The result was  interesting 
(as in the Chinese curse).
[9] Always bring 4 of everything--4
3-prong-to-2-prong plugs (because
the place where you perform won't 
have 3-prong plugs), 4 1/4-inch phone
jack-to-RCA cables, 4 XLR-to-phone-jack
transformers, 4 MIDI mergers, 4 mini-plug-
to-headphone adapters, 4 durable
equipment bags, 4 everything.  2 are
never enough and someone always needs
one extra.
[10] All these pieces of advice deal
with digital recordings rather than
analog.  Alas, there's just no comparison
twixt DAT and analog reel recordings.
The reel recordings don't measure up.
Despite the frenzied claims of the
LP and reel-to-reel fanatics, DAT
offers infinitely superior sound
quality to any possible reel recording.
--mclaren

Received: from sun4nl.NL.net [193.78.240.1] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Thu, 26 Oct 1995 09:25 +0100
Received: from eartha.mills.edu by sun4nl.NL.net with SMTP
	id AA06609 (5.65b/CWI-3.3); Thu, 26 Oct 1995 06:30:36 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id WAA09429; Wed, 25 Oct 1995 22:29:20 -0700
Date: Wed, 25 Oct 1995 22:29:20 -0700
Message-Id: <199510260528.WAA03929@hopf.dnai.com>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu