source file: mills2.txt
Date: Wed, 4 Dec 1996 08:30:30 -0800

Subject: From McLaren

From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>

From: mclaren
Subject: Paul Erlich's "tonalness" algorithm
and the purported "central pitch processor" - 2 of 2
[slightly edited for style --JC]
My previous post discussed some of the strong evidence
against Terhardt's, Wightman's and Goldstein's theories
of pitch perception, upon which Paul Erlich might have
relied too heavily in developing his "tonalness"
algorithm.
Paul Erlich is surely correct if he is stating that "there
can be no doubt" about the existence of *some* kind
of higher-level pitch detection mechanism deep inside
the brain.  Dichotic-harmonic virtual pitch experiments
have proven that conclusively.  However, while we now
know that *all* pitch perception does *not* occur
entirely in the basilar membrane *or* along the eighth
nerve, we do *not* know for certain the specific
higher-level brain mechanism which produces pitch
detection form dichotic inputs.  Nor are we at all
clear on the exact nature of the contribution from
the 8th nerve, except that it must be significant--since
deaf people can hear *something* when auditory nerves
are stimulated cyclically.
Summing up these problems with all available theories
of human audition in 1988, James O. Pickles states:
"Frequency difference limens are very much smaller
than critical bands. Two mechanisms are possible.
For instance, the subject may detect shifts in the
place of excitation of the cochlea.  This is called the
'place theory.'  Or he may use temporal information. We
know that the firing in the auditory nerve is phase-locked 
to the stimulus waveform up to about 5 khz. In this 
theory, called the 'temporal' [that is, 'periodicity'] theory,
the subject discriminates the two tones by using the
time interval between the neural firings. It is not clear
which of the two mechanisms is used. Indeed the controversy
has been active for more than 100 years, and the fact
that it is not yet settled shows that we still do not
have adequate evidence.  Auditory physiologists
divide into three groups, namely those that think
only temporal information is used, thouse that think
only place information is used, and an eclectic group, 
who suppose that temporal information is used at
low frequencies, and only place information at high."
[Pickles, J. O., "An Introduction to the Physiology of
Hearing," Academic Press, 2nd ed., 1988, pg. 271]
--
By placing perhaps excessive reliance on Terhardt's 
theory--which systematically contradicts the
psychoacoustic data in a number of cases--Paul
Erlich may have prematurely narrowed his
options too greatly.  Terhardt's theory is a
good one, in particular because it is able to explain
stretched partials heard as a "pure" harmonic series--
but even so, Terhardt's theory has problems because
it ignores the apparently important role of temporal
information in human hearing below 500 Hz, and
also because it has problems with the minor mode
in western music, and it systematically produces the
wrong predictions for inharmonic tone complexes.
One of the biggest problems with current place
theories of hearing is that they are still largely
empirical.  The reason for this is that existing 3-D
hydroelastic models for the human cochlea
are fiendishly difficult to evaluate mathematically.
In order to "determine the solution for the 
displacement of the basilar membrane, it is 
necessary to solve a nonlinear eigenvalue problem 
for the local inviscid wavenumber k zero." [Holmes, 
Mark A., "Frequency Discrimination in the Mammalian
Cochlea: Theory versus Experiment," J. Acoust.
Soc. Am., 81(1), Jan. 1987, pg. 110]
Solving a nonlinear eigenvalue problem is no
walk in the park.  The way you do this is: guess 
the solution, input it, let the computer
churn until the solution begins to diverge out
of bounds, then do it over again. And over. And 
over...  There's a large element of black magic
and intuition to this kind of thing--there's
an enormous premium on being a good
guesser.  Alas, when the p.d.e. is non-linear,
predictor-corrector methods like Runge-Kutta
don't help much.  Your solution diverges to 
infinity long before the corrector can kick
in to save it. Point-and-shoot methods like
Newton's and variations on the steepest descent
theme are even worse: they fly off to infinity
almost immediately. Adaptive methods don't
help because when the solution starts to diverge
the adaptive loop cranks the iteration
increment down to such a small value that the 
CPU bogs down and memory blows out.
So the bottom line is that we need a *lot*
more data and *much* better
mathematical models of the inner structures
of the human ear before we can hope to get
at the truth of the human auditory apparatus.
At present, the best guess is that both
place and periodicity mechanisms appear
to be involved in pitch perception, and some
sort of neural net *may* be involved.
--
Paul Erlich mentions specific "central pitch
processor" theories by Wightman and 
Goldstein.   These are hybrid theories which
became fashionable about 25 years ago
in a number of guises. Goldstein offers
one version, Wightman another, more recently
(in 1991) Meddis and Hewitt: "Virtual Pitch
and Phase sensitivity of a computer model
of the auditory periphery," I & II, 1991, J.
Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 89., pp. 2866-2894.
Wightman's pattern transformation theory
suffered a severe blow in 1979--see A. J. M.
Houtsma, "Musical pitch of 2-tone complexes
and predictions by modern pitch theories,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 66, No. 1, July 1979,
ppg. 87-98.
"Among the three popular pitch theories only
the optimum processor theory [Goldstein's]
 is able to account for most of the data
is a quantitative sense.  The virtua pitch theory,
which in its original formulation can account for
most phenomena only in a qualitative sense, can
be brought into quantitative agreement with most
experimental results through some modifications
which make it yield results very similar to the 
optimal processor theory.  The pattern transformation
theory was found to be significantly less supported
by empirical results, especially by results obtained
with successive harmonic two-tone complexes that
were already available in the literature. Attempts to
find a suitable modification of this theory that would
bring its predicitions and experimental results in
closer agreement were not successful. None of the
theories presently accounts in a quantitative way
for the apparent constatn rivalry between analytic
and synthetic mode pitch perception which is always
present in experiments that use complex tones."
[Houstmas, A. J. M., op cit., 1979, pg. 98]
And so Wightman's and Goldstein's models have been
supplanted in the 1980s and 1990s by spatio-temporal
theories most of which are non-deterministic--
that is to say they use a form of Boltzmann
machine (AKA neural net) rather than a set
of deterministic algorithms to extract
pitch.  (Note: Goldstein's model is also
non-deterministic, but to the best of my
knowledge it's not a neural net.) 
For example:  see "A Spectral Network
Model of Pitch Perception," by Cohen, M. A.,
Grossberg, S., and Wyse, L. L., J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., 98 (2), August 1995, pp. 862-879.
This last model appears to be the best one
yet, far superior to the Wightman or Goldstein
models.  For one thing the Cohen et al. "Spectral
network" model produces reasonable output
from Shepard tone input and also from Deutsch
tritone-paradox input *without* the use of
ad hoc attentional mechanisms.
Wightman's or Goldstein's model both require
external ad hoc constraints to reproduce the
Deutsch results for tritone stimuli.
Serious problems remain with the hypothesis of
a *specific* central pitch processor.  To date, no 
specific (today, neural-ent spatio-temporal) central
processor model can account for the Zwicker
tone, for the effects cited in "The influence
of duration on the perception of pitch in single
and simulatneous complex tones," Beerends, J.
G., J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 86(5), 1989, pg. 1835-
1844 ("subjects tend to switch to the
analytic mode of pitch perception when when
complex tones are shortened--i.e., they tend
to hear the psectral pitches instead of the
virtual ones"), or in Cross, West and Howell's
"Pitch Rleations and the Formation of Scalar
Structure," Music Perception, 1985, 2(3),
pp. 329-344 ("Experimental results indicate
that important aspects of musical judgment
are well accounted for by logical consequences
of such formal definitions, without the necessity
of invoking either simplicity of frequency ratios
or musical 'well-formedness.'"),  or the effects
noted in "Brightness and Octave Position: Are Changes
in Spectral Envelope and In Tone Height
Perceptually Equivalent?" Contemporary Music
Review, 1993, 9(1&2), pp. 83-95, ("Rapid changes
in spectral envelope have been reported to 
influence estimation of octave position by
musically trained listeners"), or Jan Nordmark's
points in "Mechanisms of Frequency Discrimination,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 44(6), 1968, pp. 1533-
1539 ("the main difficulties of the place theory:
why a well-defined pitch could be heard corresponding
to the fundamental of a complex sound even when
the fundamental was wek or absent, and why one
coudl be heard also for very short tones. (..) The
second difficult of the place throy arises from 
the fact that the pitch dscirimination of which 
human beings are capable seems to indicate a sharp
resonance and consequently a very low degree of
damping on the basilar membrane. The short
time required for a clear tonal impresison, on the other
hand, pointed to a high degree of damping"), or some
of Irwin Pollack's results in "Ohm's Acoustical Law
and Short-Term Auditory Memory,' J. Acoust. Soc.
Am., 36(12), 1964, pp. 2340-2345 ("Contrary to the
expectation of Ohm's acoustical law, listeners were
relatively unable to accurately 'extract' components
from nonharmonicaly related tone combinations")
or the many papers dealing with changes in virtual
pitch associated with detuning a single or a group
of harmonics in a strictly harmonic computer-generated
timbre.
In particular, slightly inharmonic tone complexes are
the Achilles' heel of central processor theories, which
violently conflict with the results of William Sethares'
mapped timbre experiments in which inharmonic
overtones are specifically algorithmically mapped
to a the sensory dissonance curve of a given non-12
scale.
--
The bottom line?
Before settling on Terhardt's thery (which the first
two papers cited in the previos post punched full of holes)
or the Wightman or Goldstein central processor theories
(also badly damaged by the 2nd and 3rd papers cited here),
At the start, circa 400 B.C., Empedocle's theory of
"implanted air" assumed that all pitch perception
took place directly in the ear; by the 1840s, Helmholtz
thought pitch perception took place entirely in the
cochlea.  By the 1940s Schouten et al. thought pitch
perception took place entirely in the 8th nerve,
and by the 1970s Wightman, Goldstein, et al. thought
pitch perception took place much farther inside
the brain via a computer-like mathematical
algorithm.  The most recent (1991, 1995) pitch
perception theories assume that hearing takes
place in a complex neural net distributed throughout
the higher brain loci.  Instead of an algorithmic loop,
these spectral network theories have more of the
flavor of a cake being baked--you can specify
pretty precisely the ingredients and procedures
required  to bake a cake with the required 
characteristics, but the math of baking a cake
molecule-by-molecule is imponderable--it's a 
highly parallel and highly non-linear process
in which the main events are thermodynamic rather
than algorithmic (as in neural nets, whose distribution
of nodal weights is more usefully viewed from the
point of view of entropy than of algorithms).
Notice, first, that successive investigators have
chased the "location" of pitch perception farther
and farther up the inner ear and into the brain,
until today there's no "location" at all other
than a large set of ganglia spread throughout
the Sylvian fissure.
Second, notice that each era described pitch
perception in terms of the highest technology
then available: in 400 B.C., a vibrating
drum, in the 1840s a mechanical Fourier
transformer, in the 1940s a time-based
electronic autocorrelator, in the 1970s
a complex computer program operating as
a "central processor," in the 1990s a highly
parallel neural net.

--mclaren




Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 6 Dec 1996 01:15 +0100
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA22013; Thu, 5 Dec 1996 16:02:55 +0100
Received: from eartha.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA21950
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <manuel.op.de.coul@ezh.nl> id HAA21562; Thu, 5 Dec 1996 07:02:51 -0800
Date: Thu, 5 Dec 1996 07:02:51 -0800
Message-Id: <961205145941_71670.2576_HHB56-3@CompuServe.COM>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu