source file: mills2.txt


Subject: various

From: bq912@freenet.uchsc.edu (Neil G. Haverstick)

Haverstick here...first of all, I've always loved the harmonica and
thought it was very underated as an instrument...I've played for 26
years with a great harmonica player in Denver named Clay Kirkland (who
does have a killer CD available...which just happens to include a
certain microtonal guitarist playing some 12 tone blues/rock). Great
to have Pat on this forum...

Second, I've just been thinking of my old mentor in Kansas City, Ed Toler,
and remembering how he used to refer to his concept of playing as "10,000
Monkeys chattering at 10,000 typewriters"...well, that's how I am appro-
aching the tuning thing. I believe there can be an infinite number of
intervals and ways to use them. Another teacher of mine, George Keith,
always said to avoid becoming attached to any single concept of music;
he advised studying many different ways of expressing music, and draw
from them what suits you. I took that advice, so terms such as semitone,
scale, intervals, and whatever can all have myriad meanings, always
depending on the kind of EFFECT you are trying to create with the musical
tools at hand. So, with hundreds of billions of galaxies and stars 
flying around out there, how many musical concepts could possibly exist?
To me, this is not idle thought...maybe the sounds of these scales are
floating around in the Universe, and perhaps some of these sounds can
be picked up by us...and, maybe there are sounds we will never hear, but
which could drive another order of beings into ecstasy.

I've long called my concept the Form Of No Forms, and this certainly
extends to tuning theory as well. All of the opinions I see on this
forum are noted and examined, and then eventually will filter into my
music somehow. I think the time is absolutely right for a new approach
to music, an approach wherein tunings are no big deal, and people may
actually move between tunings in a commonplace way. As the father of
a 7 year old girl, I see how powerful it can be to bring up a child
in the arts...to Neela, talk of music and tunings is commonplace; and,
I will never teach her that there are only 12 tones in music. So, I
believe that if we are persistent in trying to reach folks about the
brainwashing we all were given regarding music theory, we can change
it...it's really not too hard for people to understand...Hstick

------------------------------

Date: Sun, 14 Jul 1996 09:15:11 -0700 (PDT)
From: John Chalmers <non12@deltanet.com>
To: tuning
Subject: Long post from McLaren
Message-ID: <Pine.SCO.3.91.960714091429.27133A-100000@delta1.deltanet.com>

From: mclaren
Subject: The fracas on the tuning forum
 circa digest 702
--
More than one correspondent has noted the hullabuloo
around tuning digest 702.  
John Chalmers incorrectly pointed out my "major error," 
in a post itself seriously in error--my factual statement
that "Xenharmonikon is published and vetted outside
of academia" *was* factual, *is* factual, and *will be*
factual for the foreseeable future.  Then Paul Rapoport
chimed in, advising that "We need fewer hurricanes
from the Northwest" when apprised of the gross
inadequacy of his bibliographies  As will be shown in 
a series of upcoming posts, "inadequate" does not even 
*begin*  to describe Paul Rapoport's bibliographies.
Then we heard in rapid succession from  Paul Erlich,
who demonstrated a lack of  understanding of the 
difference between entropy and randomness (the two 
are *not* identical, especially when dealing with 
information). And finally Greg Taylor chimed in--
of him no more need be said.
Whew!
That's a Mount Everest of misinformation.
So you'll pardon me if it takes a while to refute all
the nonsense, half-truths, gross errors, and outright
falsities.
Microtonality is difficult enough for newcomers, without
making it *more* difficult for them by feeding them
a bunch of errors--especially when those errors
are made by folks who purport to "correct" my
posts.
But the real issue here isn't so much errors, as
attitudes.
The words "crank" and "ravings" played a prominent
part in the posts around digest 702.
Even allowing for the natural excess of the flame warrior,
such language is inappropriate to this forum.  Paul Erlich
has been a prime mover in using this silly kind of language,
along with Gregory Taylor, and frankly it's embarrassing.
This kind of flame-war rhetoric doesn't belong on this
forum.
I've perused  700+ posts since the start of this forum, and 
so far none of them can be fairly described as the work
of "cranks."  
Moreover, not one subscriber has struck me as "raving," 
although various folks (again, notably Paul Erlich and
Gregory Taylor) do occasionally get their facts mixed up.
So the real question is:
Why is such violent and bizarre language used by
a handful of folks to describe my posts?
What emotions can I have stirred in otherwise
normal, well-adjusted, intelligent people to
cause them to post such wild accusations?
Well, ladies and gentlemen, here's the answer--
My posts have struck terror into the hearts of
the musical 12-ton-equal-tempered cognitive
elite (and their toadies) because the 12-TET 
establishment is ready to collapse.
And guess what?
People with power (and their toadies) know something 
that the rest of us tend to forget--
They know that small ideas have a way of 
becoming large ones. 
People in power go berserk when they encounter
even 1 dissenting voice...
--Because they know that order  which is imposed 
by oppression  and by the crushing of dissent is a 
very fragile kind of order indeed.
And this describes perfectly the state of America's
concert halls and conservatories.
One or two otherwise sensible forum subscribers have
 tried to paint me as a "crank" for saying this.
They have described my statements in this regard as
"ravings."
Aside from the question of whether or not my
statements make sense (which you would not
expect from the "ravings" of a "crank"), let's
ask whether my opinions are in the minority...
Am I all alone in describing the way that the 
12-TET Alice Tully Hall Lincoln Center 
Juilliard Converatory establishment 
oppresses people who try to step out the
sacred 12 tones...?
Here is what microtonalist Pauline Oliveros 
has to say on the subject:
"An important issue is the marginalization
of our music. As far as the establishment is
concerned, we don't exist.  We can do anything
we want, in the margins.  But as soon as we
want to bring it before a larger audience, 
we don't exist.  And that, to me, is
censorship." [Oliveros, Pauline, "Discussion One,"
Ear Magazine, 1991, pg. 22]
If my statements constitute the "ravings" of
a "crank," then Pauline Oliveros must be
raving as well.  Pauline Oliveros must also
be a crank.
In Tuning Digest 686, I pointed out that the
exhaustion of 12-TET theory had led to 
a situation in which "As readers of [Perspectives
of New Music] well know, the once-respected 
magazine has in the last few years descended 
into a frenzied downward spiral of gibberish 
which staggers the imagination and inspires 
both terror and pity.  Terror, for the reputations 
of the people who contributed to the infamous 
1993 'Complexity' issue of PNM; and pity for 
anyone who misguidedly paid money to read 
this swill. Now, 'swill' might seem like a harsh 
word.
"Perhaps.
"Perhaps not.
"You can judge for yourself." - mclaren
These, allegedly, were the "ravings" of a 
"crank."
Purportedly, this was an example of my
"invective."
How about a second opinion?
How about seeing  what microtonalist
Trevor Wishart has to say on the subject?
"In its constant search for new modes of
expression, the Western classical music
tradition was...constrained by its very
concentration upon relationships of a 
limited set of thus notatable `pitches,'
to extend the notatable field of harmonic
relationships to the limit. The final step
into a 12-tone and thence 'integral' serial
technique, rather than being a 'liberation'
from this restricted set tonality, must be
seen in historical perspective as the final
total capitulation to the finitistic permut-
ational dictates of a rationalized analytic
notation system, and the gateway to much
sterile rational formalism..." [Wishart,
Trevor, "Musical Writing, Musical Speaking,"
in "Whose Music? A Sociology Of Musical
Language," Ed. J. Shepherd, P. Virden,
G. Vulliamy and T. Wishart, Latimer, London,
1977]
Sounds like Trevor Wishart is saying the
same thing I'm saying.  So now when
Trevor Wishart speaks, *he* must be
"raving"  too.  He must also be a "crank."
And what else have I said to cause such
fear and loathing?
Let's see...
In a number of tuning digests, I've 
pointed out the obvious fact that John Cage's 
"music" is a con job produced by an
untalented con artist--stunts devoid of musical
value, obsessed with theory, exuding the
bitter taste of mud dragged up from the
bottom of an intonationally  dry well.
When they heard these statements, a remarkable
number of otherwise sensible folks raised their 
voices in a shrill chorus, decrying my statement
of the obvious as the "ravings" of a "crank."
Thus, when Edward Fox writes in The Wire
Magazine: 
"..."There are a lot of good reasons for listening
to [Morton Feldman's] music. For one, Feldman
was not a musical ideologue or a conceptualist.
In this he was very different from Cage, whose
music was almost entirely theoretical and based
on a cult of the personality of Cage. Much of
Cage is unlistenable now as a result. You can
*listen* to Feldman." [Fox, Edward, "Annihilated
Angel," The Wire, Issue 134, April 1995, pg. 38]
..Well, when Edward Fox speaks, he must be
spouting the "ravings" of a "crank."
And when TIME magazine writes in its obituary
of John Cage that "Finally there is the not at 
all negligible matter of how the music sounds.
A  common philistine criticism of avant-garde
art used to be that small children banging on 
pots and pans or flinging paint at a canvas could
have produced exactly the same effect. In Cage's
case, at least, this is very probably true... A
concert of Cage's noises is, by and large, as
much of a room emptier as it was when the
work was new; Cage may be the first important 
artist whose work one wants neither to hear
nor see." [Walsh, Michael, "Sounds of Silence,'
Time, November 1 1993, pg. 88]
..Well, clearly, when TIME magazine writes
such things we must realize that *these* also
are the "ravings" of a "crank."
What is wrong with this picture, ladies and
gentlemen?
Do you get a sour taste in your mouth whenever
anyone who dares to disagree is labelled
a "crank" and described as "raving"?
I sure do.
That kind of logic smells bad--especially on
discussion thread which consistently maintains
the high standards of this one.
No, that kind of logic just doesn't parse.
For one thing, isn't it peculiar how many "cranks" are
"raving" exactly in the same manner?
And isn't it odd how much the so-called musical 
cognitive elite (whose cognitive faculties are
in doubt) have to lose if they admit the obvious,
and agree that con artists like Cage have in
fact driven audiences away from concerts of
This is a most curious epidemic of madness--
huge numbers of people seem to have gone
insane, all at once.  And we're *all* making the same
cogent argument--the emperor's got no clothes.  
Modernism is dead.  Contemporary 12-TET academic 
music has become obsessed with theory to the 
exclusion of all else, elevating words above
mere sounds...
But then, I forget--these are the "ravings" of a
"crank."
In that case, when Ingram Marshall writes
"Modernism is an obsession with theory; it is
an obsession with both the object and idea
of art as self-referential.  Modernism begins
probably with Schoenberg and ends with, say,
Boulez and Cage." [Marshall, Ingram, "MODERNISM--
Forget it!" Soundings 11, 1981, pg. 74]
..Then Ingram Marshall must be "raving"--he must
also be a "crank." 
And when Derek B. Scott writes in The Musical
Quarterly that "Schoenberg went so far as to
say: 'Nearly all the works nowadays generally
acclaimed...met, when still new, with a cold
or even hostile reception.' (..) Time and again
we are told of the existence of modern
masterpieces that lovers of music have
perversely refused to take to their hearts, but
that the day will surely come when these works 
receive their just recognition.  However, the 
question being asked now is, when indeed will
that day come?  One reads calmly Wilfrid Mellers'
assurance in 1968 that "Pli Selon Pli" 'will
establish itself as a crucial masterpiece of our
time.' Yet, Slonimsky's law of the forty-year
gap between the arrival of a masterpiece and its
general acceptance already has had to be doubled
in the case of Erwartung, the work Robert Craft
thought Schoenberg's masterpiece. This creates
a paradox for those who see longevity as a valuer
of 'great art,' for while The Mikado manages to
survive despite high-minded scorn, Erwartung
survives largely as a result of special pleading."
[Scott, Derek B. "Music and Sociology for the 1990s:
A Changing Critical Perspective," Musical Quarterly,
Vol. 74, No. 3, 1990, pg. 389]
..Then, clearly, these are *also* the "ravings" of a 
"crank."
And when in the same article Scott points out
"It has taken a long time for a theory of musical
relativism to gain ground. A major reason for the
delay has been the amount of time consumed in the
futile search for an underlying coherent theory by
which modernism could be rationally explained and 
understood when there should have been a recognition
that modernism had distingrated into irrationality,
failure, and irrelevance." [Scott, Derek B. "Music and 
Sociology for the 1990s: A Changing Critical 
Perspective," Musical Quarterly, Vol. 74, No. 3, 1990, 
pg. 389]
..Then we must ask an uncomfortable question--
Can *all* these people be "cranks"?
Can so many cogent voices pointing out that modernism
is dead, 12-TET is exhausted, and it's time to move
on to something else... can *all* these people be
This is not a trivial issue.  
It doesn't have to do with me or with the lynch mob
that tried to string me up around digest 702 so
much as with the future of music.
The issue is important, ladies and gentlemen, and
I shall continue to bring it up again and *again*
and AGAIN on this tuning forum, because it is by
no means certain that microtonality represents 
the future of music.
We know modernism is dead...  We know that composers
like Cage and Boulez killed 12-TET with a tidal wave
of narcissism, nihilism, and self-indulgence (to use
the exact words of the New York Times--presumably
the "ravings" of yet more "cranks")...
But there are *many* paths away from modernism.  One
path leads to microtonal expansion of melodic and harmonic
resources...others lead to a contraction--even
a reactionary impoverishment of melodic and harmonic
resources.
Thus, when Scott states "Throughout the 1980s criticism
was mounting from the political right and left, from
sociologists, ethnomusicologists and anthropologists.
The feeling that Western 'art music' was in crisis
pervaded many of the decade's articles: the title, for
example, of Michael Kowalski's article "The Exhaustion
of Western Art Mustic" speaks for itself... (..) It became
pointless to debate whether Boulez, Cage or Tippett
represented the way ahead for high culture since, to echo
a well-known song, those taking the high road had been
overtaken by those taking the low raod.  Even among the 
middle classes and the 'educated'--and among 'serious'
musicians--attention has been drifting away from
contemporary high culture to popular culture.  The 
attention which a television arts program would have 
given to a major new work by Tippett in the 1970s
was more likely to be directed toward a new album
by Elvis Costello in the 1980s." [Scott, Derek B. "Music and 
Sociology for the 1990s: A Changing Critical 
Perspective," Musical Quarterly, Vol. 74, No. 3, 1990, 
pg. 390] ...When he writes these words, there it is.
It's right  on the table.
Here's the crux of the dilemma, ladies and gentlemen.
Charlatans like Cage and Boulez have so throroughly
alienated audiences by miring 12-TET music in
a tarpit of masturbatory theory, that to many people 
nowadays "serious" music means "meaningless idiocy 
and endless theoretical claptrap."
There is *still* a chance to reclaim the dwindling
audience for modern music, but we're *not* going
to do it by remarking on the glamour of the 
naked emperor's new clothes.
There's a good chance to revive modern music 
even after the hatchet job performed on it by
Cage and Boulez and Babbitt and Ferneyhough--
the surge in popularity of Partch's music *proves*
that.  The popularity of the "Bang On A Can"
concerts (which include a substantial share of 
non-12 music, from Arnold Dreyblatt's just intonation 
"orchestra of excited strings" to Julia Wolfe's "Steam" 
for Harry Partch's instruments and amplified flute, to
Annie Gosfield's 24-TET "The Manufacture of Tangled
Ivory") demonstrate that in spades.
People *will* come to listen to serious modern
music--unless we drive them away.
People *will* still listen to serious modern 
music, as long as we don't insult their intelligence...
as the otherwise sensible Paul Erlich has insulted 
*your* intelligence by trying to get you to believe 
that I'm a "crank." 
Music is going through a tectonic upheaval right now--
modernism is dead and in the process of collapsing...
but nothing has yet arrived to take its place. 
If we don't insult our audience's intelligence,
microtonality might well be what comes out of
this tectonic upheaval.  
But there's no guarantee.
And so when people like the otherwise credible Paul Erlich
try to paint me as a "crank," or as mentally ill, or as
an amusing but fundamentally ignorant know-nothing,
it's simply foolish--what I'm saying makes too 
much sense.  You know it.  I know it.  We all know it.
This, ladies and gentlemen, is not  a horse with 
legs, as they say at Belmont Park.  
This pony won't run.  
The average person on the street knows that
what I'm saying is *exactly* true--modern music
ran into a rut, fell into a ditch, and lost touch
with both audiences *and* real passion,
real emotion, real fist-in-the-gut impact.
And that's why this issue is so terribly important
to this tuning forum.  
We have a window of opportunity here--a limited 
one.  It won't last long.  
And if we microtonalists make the same mistake
the modernists made, and if we spiral down into
a dizzy abyss of sterile theory and obfuscatory
gibberish as James Boros has done, then microtonality 
won't cut it.
People will turn away.  They'll listen to pop
rock, or rap, or some other kind of music...
They'll listen to music which lacks
the complexity and sophistication
of "serious" music, but which *doesn't* insult
their intelligence the way the productions of
Babbitt and Cage and Boulez did--they will
listen, instead, to music which *DOES* have 
some real emotional impact.
So when a handful of otherwise reasonable folks
try to paint me as a "raving" "crank," they are setting
a very specific course for the musical future.
"Theory ueber alles!" is their watchword. "To hell
with what the music sounds like, let's have some
more diagrams!" 
That's their message.
I contend that it's time to admit modernism is
dead.
I say it's time to admit that theory and diagrams
and equations have driven out  consideration of 
what a piece of music actually 
*sounds* like.
I say it's time to start over again.  Throw out
modernism, throw out the 12-TET Forte/Rahn/
Babbitt  pitch class matrix cliches, get
back to the acoustics and psychoacoustics of
music and sound--and renew "serious" Western
music by expanding its melodic and harmonic
resources xenharmonically.
Decide for yourself--are these the "ravings"
of a "crank"?
Think carefully.  On your decision may rest the
future of serious contemporary Western music.
--mclaren