source file: mills2.txt
Date: Wed, 18 Oct 1995 08:09:28 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Tuning & psychoacoustics - post 23 of 25
---
Psychoacoustics is an empirical science. Mathematical theories abound, 
but they are attempts to explain experimental evidence. There are no valid "a priori" theories of hearing.
Psychoacoustics uses choice and adjustment methods, along with 
computer analysis of live performances.  The first methods  involve laboratory  setting, while the second generally does not. 
Overall results from both settings tend to agree. 
Psychoacoustic researchers are prone to bias.  The goal of scientific 
investigation is not to reduce or eliminate the prejudice of the 
investigator, but to reduce or eliminate its effect on the measured 
results. All of the psychoacoustic researchers cited so far have tuning 
preferences. 
Some of these researchers warp the presentation of results to favor a given 
tuning system, while others do not.
Ohm (1843), Helmholtz (1863) and Pikler (1898) strongly favored  just 
intonation tunings and the ear-as-Fourier-analyzer model. To explain away 
the empirical evidence that 19th-century composers and performers 
universally used equal tempered tunings, Helmholtz claimed that modern 
performers were incompetent and that "true" (i.e., just) intonation was a 
lost art, requiring superlative skill. To refute the empirical evidence that 
most people who listened to music seemed to like equal-tempered intervals, 
Helmholtz claimed that modern listeners had been brainwashed by equal 
temperament.
In order to determine a listener's "true"  preference among musical 
intervals, he contended, one needs must find an ear uncomtaminated by 
debased modern equal-tempered music.  Since ears accustomed to pure just 
intonation and unsullied by equal temperament were not to be found in 19th 
century Europe, Helmholtz's hypothesis ran afoul of the first demand on any 
scientific hypothesis: namely, that it be testable. 
However, in the second edition of his book "On the Sensations of Tone," 
Helmholtz modified his original position and wrote that music "does not 
rest solely upon inalterable natural laws, but is also, at least partly, the 
result  of esthetical principles, which have already changed, and will still 
further change, with the progressive development of humanity." [Helmholtz, 
Hermann, "On the Sensation of Tone," 2nd. Dover ed., 1863, pg. 235]
Helmholtz is thus a contradictory figure, on the one hand explaining away 
empirical evidence with various pieces of circular reasoning, and on the 
other hand openly suggesting that the third, or learned, model for hearing 
had a strong influence on the auditory system.
Pikler and Ohm proved less open-minded, and they consistently bury results 
which conflict with just intonation as the "best" tuning. 
Seebeck (1843), Stumpf (1896) Schouten (1938), Boomsliter & Creel (1965), 
Plomp (1967) and Roederer (1973) are strongly biased toward the 
periodicity model of the ear.   Of these, Seebeck, Schouten and Stumpf do not 
attempt to explain all pitch processing or auditory phenomena on the basis 
of the periodicity theory: they simply give their results and omit mention of 
data which would tend to contradict their conclusions. 
Plomp's approach deserves special mention.  He argues tenaciously and at 
length against von Bekesy's place theory near the end of his magnum opus, 
Experiments In the Tone Sensation (1967).  After describing a model of the 
ear's pitch and spectral-analysis functions as a set of 1/3-octave bandpass 
filters, Plomp goes on to state: "This model of the ear's frequency-analyzing 
mechanism must be considered as a simplified representation, since the ear 
does not containa  limited number of fixed filters but is a continuous 
system of overlapping filters. Nevertheless, Figure 60 elegantly accounts 
for both the discrimination of the lower harmonics and the preservation of 
periodicity.  The way in which these waveforms give rise in the ear to 
periodic nerve impulses, however, is still rather unknown." [Plomp, 
"Experiments In the Tone Sensation," pg. 128, 1967]
Plomp mentions experiments by de Boer (1956), Schouten (1962), Ritsma 
and Engel (1964) and Licklider (1956, 1959, 1962)--all staunch advocates 
of the periodicity theory.  Significantly, Plomp does not mention any of the 
experiments which tend to contradict the periodicity theory of hearing--in 
particular, Flanagan and Guttman's 1959 experiments and the removal of the 
fundamental from the Seebeck click series.  These experiments *are 
*described by von Bekesy.
By neglecting to cite the full range of experimental results, Plomp creates a 
false impression that all psychoacoustic data support the periodoicity 
theory.  Moreover, he neglects to mention that the Fourier-analysis (or 
place) theory of hearing could equally well account for the fact that pitch is 
primarily determined by the lower harmonics of a sound, and that even when 
those lower harmonics are masked by noise the ear still detects a definite 
pitch.  "Apart from the question of how a model spanning only two octaves 
can throw any light on the perception of a complex tone, we may ask how 
this observation can explain why the pitch of a complex tone is not altered 
when the lower harmonics are masked completely by noise... In that case, 
thecontribution fo the place corresonding to the fundamental is eliminated." 
[Plomp, "Experiments In the Tone Sensation," 1967, pg. 130]
Oddly, Plomp neglects to mention the obvious place-theory explanation of 
this effect. This phenomenon is well known from the perception of definite 
pitch ascribed to bells: the ear operates as a Fourier analyzer and fits the 
partials of the bell into the higher members of a harmonic series, then 
assigns the bell a perceived pitch given by the assumed fundamental.  If the 
ear's Fourier analysis can assign a nonexistant fundamental to a bell, why 
not to a strictly harnonic sound whose lower harmonics are masked by 
noise?
Houtsma summarizes this explanation concisely: "De Boer (1956) reported 
pitch matches in which inharmonic complex tones comprising five or seven 
partials with uniform frequency spacing were aurally matched to periodic 
complex tones with a fundamental that differed systematically from the 
spectral spacing of the inharmonic sound. Schouten, Ritsma and Cardozo 
(1962) produced similar data for AM complexes (three partials)...and 
smoorenburg (1970) found essentially the same results using complexes 
consisting of only two tones. [Houstma, A.J.M., and Goldstein, J.L., "The 
Central Origin of the Pitch of Complex Tones: Evidence from Musical Interval 
Recognition," Journ. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol 51, No. 2, 1971, pg. 525]
Moreover, Plomp glosses over the most serious objection to the periodicity 
theory--namely, that because of the duration imposed on the impulses from 
nerve fibers in the inner ear, pitches above 1600 Hz should not be 
perceptible. "The physiological process which sets an upper limit to the 
frequency of impulses in each fiber is the refractory period. For a brief 
interval of approximately 1 msec after each impulse the nerve-fiber is not 
excitable and cannot transmit another impulse." [Boring, E. G. and A. Forbes, 
Hearing: Its Psychology and Physiology, 1983, 2nd ed., pg. 401]  Plomp's 
response to these objections is worth noting:  
"The hypothesis that hte pitch of a tone is based on the period of the sound 
waves may be criticized ont eh ground that this periodicity is preserved up 
to 3000-4000 cps, whereas we are able to distinguish tones up to about 
16000 cps. This discrepancy is one of the most serious arguments against 
periodicity pitch. It is obviated by Wever's assumption (Chapter 7) that the 
ear is provided with two ptich-detecting mechanisms: one, based on 
periodicity, for low frequency and one, based on place of maximal 
stimulation along the basilar membrane, for high frequencies.  This 
conception is not very attractive, however." [Plomp, "Experiments In the 
Tone Sensation, 1967, pg. 130]
This is a remarkable statement. Plomp saves the periodicity model of pitch 
by dragging in another model of ear/brain function, then criticizing his own 
conclusion!
Plomp never explains why the idea of multiple auditory pitch detection 
mechansisms is "not very attractive."  Moreover, his arguments for the 
periodicity theory lose much of their power because he's forced to appeal to 
the very theory he's arguing against (the place theory) in order to save the 
periodicity theory for notes with high fundamentals.
In several cases where both the periodicty and place theories offer equal 
explanatory power, Plomp consistently comes down on the side of the 
periodicity theory.  Consider the following example:
"Upon presenting tone intervals with the same freuqnecy ratios to the ear, 
for instance the mistuned interval 200 + 601 cps, the same phenomena were 
observed as with (von Bekesy's) model. This corresondence was considered 
by von Bekesy as an affirmation that in both cases the same mehcanism is 
involved.  In his opinion, it seems clear that the periodicity of the nerve 
impulses does not play an important part in the production of beats.
Although this reasoning appears rather attractive, I prefer an alternative 
explanation of the beats which is based on the assumption that pitch is 
related to the periodicity of nerve impulses." [Plomp, "Experiments In the 
Tone Sensation," 1967, pg. 125]
Perhaps even the most diligent researchers become confused when 
attempting to explain away their own biases.  At least Plomp admits his 
prejudice: "In the writer's opinion, this explanation of pitch perception in 
terms of periodicity is more satifactory than those based on the palce 
principle. If the pitch of complex tones is derived from periodicity, it is 
difficult to see why this should not be the case for simple tones, too." 
[Plomp, "Experiments In the Tone Sensation," 1967, pg. 129]  
Aside from the fact that many of his objections to the place theory are 
easily answered, and that he neglects to point out some of the most serious 
problems with the periodicity theory, Plomp is reasonably straightforward 
about his leanings toward the periodicity theory.
Boomsliter & Creel, in "The Long Pattern Hypothesis in Music," Journ. Mus. 
Theory, 1965, are not so forthcoming.
They are strongly prejudiced toward just intonation, and their article does 
not cite results which tend to contradict either periodicity or JI tunings 
(viz., combination tones, the universal preference for stretched intervals, 
etc.) and they explicitly attempt to derive all of the ear's functions from the 
periodicity theory.  For example, there's no mention of the body of 
psychoacoustic evidence for a universal preference for stretched intervals, 
and Boomsliter and Creel explain away their own data showing a general 
preference for just intervals on their "search organ" singificantly larger 
than those predicted by the just intonation theory of small whole numbers. 
The same is true of Roederer in his book's section on the physical makeup of 
the ear/brain system: there is a great deal of discussion of neurons and 
neural firing pattern, none at all on the processing of medullar and higher 
brain areas nor any detailed discussion of von Bekesy's experiments, the 
physical action of the organ of Corti, etc.  However to his credit Roederer 
does cite extensively the results of Ward, Corso, Terhardt, Sundberg and 
Lindqvist for the unviersal preference of stretched invtervals.  
Thus Roederer, like Helmholtz, is a contradictory figure--deliberately 
overemphaszing some of the evidence, while remaining open-minded about 
other contradictory results. Fetis (1943), Ellis (1885) Corso (1954), Ward 
(1970),  Burns (1970), Hood (1975) and Erickson (1983) are all strongly 
biased toward the ear-as-controlled-by-learned-preference model of 
hearing.  Terhardt and Ward/Burns tend to bury evidence which does not 
favor their view by dumping a superflux of additional results on top of the 
relevant data; this has the same effect as squirelling the relevant data 
away in a bibliograhy at the back of the article, but it achieves the same end 
by opposite means. Fetis, Hood, Ellis, tend to stress the  multiplicity of 
results and musical cultures, rather than concentrating on empirical data 
from specific experiments.
Von Bekesy demonstrates a bias toward the place theory but his bias does 
not appear to affect his willingness to bring forward contradictory results. 
In particular, he cites both the periodicity and place theories as worthy of 
additional investigation in his 1966 article "Hearing Theories and Complex 
Sounds," Journal of the Acoustic Society of America. 
Terhardt & Zick, Kameoka & Kuriyaga, Pierce, Mathews, Green, Wessel, 
Risset  and Sundberg do not exhibit a bias toward any specific theory of 
hearing.  These authors all cite competing hypotheses and suggest lines of 
further experimental inquiry into all 3 ear/brain models.
Throughout this article the intent has been to present psychoacoustics data 
as clearly as possible.
In many cases this meant extracting experimental results from layers of 
refutation or from citations buried in bibliographies because this or that 
psychoacoustician preferred not to bring the inconventient result out into 
the body of the text, where it might raise embarassing questions.
In other cases, viz., Risset or von Bekesy or Pierce, extensive direct quotes 
of secondary sources were used because these sources offered the most 
detailed survey of the evidence.
Thus the casual reader must be wary of Roederer, Helmholtz, Plomp and 
other sources widely cited because of the covert (sometimes overt) bias 
toward this or that tuning or theory or hearing.
As mentioned at the outset, acousticians have fared far worse than 
psychoacoustics researchers in this regard.  
Backus (1969), like von Bekesy, is biased toward just intonation--but unlike 
von Bekesy he neglects to mention any of the psychoacoustic experiments 
which cast doubt on either just intonation as the ideal tuning system or the 
place theory as the sole explanation of hearing.  In the chapter ""Intervals, 
Scales, Tuning, and Temperament," Backus lavishes 3 pages on just 
intonation and 2 pages on Pythagorean intonation but only 1 page on equal 
temperament. No tunings are mentioned  other than Pythagorean, meantone, 
just intonation and equal temperament: there is, for example, no reference 
to pelog, slendro, the Indian srutis, or any other non-European tuning..
Moreover, Backus buries or is not aware of many psychoucstic data which 
contradict his view of the ear as simple Fourier analyzer.  In part (as 
mentioned earlier) this is because Backus had the bad luck to publish his 
book "The Science of Musical Acoustics" just before computers introduced 
an immense unpheaval into acoustic and auditory research. In part the 
problem appears to be overt prejudice against acoustic results which do not 
favor just intonation.  As mentioned earlier, texts by Rossing and Hall 
supersede the acoustics in Backus and the psychoacoustics  (where Backus 
refers to them at all) are incorrect as well as out of date. Thus Backus' 
entire text should be ignored.
Benade (1975) cannot excuse his lapses on the basis of bad timing. In the 
period 1970-1974 much of the data cited throughout this series of posts 
was already well known; Benade chooses not only to ignore it, but actually 
to argue with a number of independently-confirmed results, particularly the 
universal preference for stretched musical intervals and the accumulated 
evidence for the periodicity theory.   
For example: "Experiments by Paul Boomsliter and Warren Creel give us very 
important information on what a musician actually does about tuning.  My 
discussion in this capter is strongly influenced by these data, although I do 
not completely accept their published interpretatiojn.  Paul C. Boomsliter 
and Warren Creel, "The Long Pattern Hypothesis in harmony and hearing," J. 
Mus. Theory, Vol. 5, No. 2, 1961, pp. 2-30, and Paul C. Boomsliter and Warren 
Creel, "Extended Reference: AN Unrecognized Dynamic in Melody," J. Mus. 
Theory, vol. 7, No. 2, 1963: pp. 2-22. " [Benade, A., "Fundamentals of Musical 
Acoustics, 1975, pg. 303]
In short, Benade agrees with Boomsliter and Creel's claim for "small-
integer-ratio" detectors in the ear, but rejects the evidence they provide for 
the periodicity theory of hearing.   Benade's commentary is notable because 
[1] it is hidden away in a  footnote and [2] it ignores the fact that a wealth 
of additional evidence supports the periodicity theory of hearing--evidence 
which cannot be easily explained by the place theory, which Benade 
espouses.
Again: "Everywhere in our experiments we have found indications that our 
nervous system processes complex sounds coming to it by seeking out 
whetever subsets of almost harmonically related components it can find." 
[Benade, A., "Fundamentals of Musical Acoustics," 1975, pg. 68]
This statement is as deceptive as it is true.  The accuracy of Benade's claim 
depends on experiments he chooses to perform: and by failing to perform 
auditory experiments which would cast doubt on the place theory of hearing, 
Benade creates the impression that no such doubt exists.  As has been seen 
throughout this article, there is ample evidence both to support and 
contradict the place theory of hearing (and to support and contradict the 
other two models of hearing as well). By omitting mention of any of this 
additional evidence, Benade creates a profoundly misleading impression in 
the unwary reader.  The implication of Benade's statement is that all 
psychoacoustic experiments support the place theory of hearing--entirely 
untrue, as we have seen.
Again: "The situation with tones having harmonic partials is much more 
straightforward.  We have already learned that pitch-matchings between 
usccessive and superposed tones are in agreement the tones consist of a 
few strong partials." [Benade, A., "Fundamentals of Musical Acoustics," 
1975, pg. 302]
The psychoacoustic data do not support this claim.  On the contrary: every 
psychoacoustic experiment since the 1830s shows a distinct and 
measurable difference betwen intervals heard as "perfect" when played 
successively and when played simultaneously, with a strong tendency for 
successive tones to be played wider than simultaneous tones, and a 
consistent tendency for both categories of tones to be played wider than 
small-integer ratios.  Clearly in this case Benade is unware of (or has 
chosen to ignore) 150 years of  psychouacoustic data.
For these reasons Benade's text is unreliable insofar as it bears on 
psychoacoustics.  Some of Benade's acoustic results remain valid, others 
have been disproven--particularly Benade's discussion of oscillation 
patterns in woodwinds and his theory of regimes of oscillation for brass 
instruments.  On balance the entire text should be ignored in favor of more 
detailed and far more accurate treatments by Rossing, Fletcher, Askill and 
Lord Rayleigh.
Rossing and Fletcher's "The Physics of Musical Instruments," and Askill's 
"The Physics of Musical Sound" remain excellent surveys of the state of the 
art in musical acoustics.  As mentioned, however, little information on 
psychoacoustics can be gleaned from these texts because psychoacoustics is 
not their concern.  These texts do not cite appreciable amounts of 
psychoacoustic data and should not be quoted to support this or that tuning 
or theory of hearing.
"Musical Acoustics: An Introduction," by Donald Hall, 1980, contains an 
accurate precis of acoustics of piano strings, metallohpohnes and 
woodwinds, as well as good survey of brass instruments, et alii. Hall is 
strongly biased toward just intonation and he buries or calls into question 
psychoacoustic data which do not accord with his prejudices. The acoustic 
portion of Hall's text is impeccable and worth reading, while the section of 
the book which bears on tuning systems and psychocoustics is incomplete, 
outdated, full of errors of omission, and should be ignored.
The single best overall survey of psychoacoustic experiments peformed up 
to the 1960s is Plomp's 1966 text "Experiments In the Tone Sensation." It 
contains an exhaustive bibliography unmatched anywhere else, and 
constantly uses extensive direct quotes from the original sources.  Plomp 
exhibits a constant and strong bias toward the periodicity theory; however, 
he readily admits his prejudice.
He is also conscientious in pointing out behaviours of the human ear which 
are not well explained.
Georg von Bekesy is biased toward the place theory; not surprising, 
inasmuch as his work put the place (Fourier) theory of hearing on a firm 
foundation. He cites both the periodicity and place theories as deserving 
further study, however,  and (like Plomp) also cites results which 
contradict all three  models of the ear/brain system.  
"Experiments in Hearing," New York: Robert E. Krieger, 1960 and republished 
in 1980, is the single best source of references for the place theory of 
hearing. 
Harvey Fletcher's "Speech and Hearing in Communication," 1953, is dated but 
unlike Backus and Benade it is not rendered worthless by overt bias.  Better 
texts now exist (Sundberg, Rossing, Pierce, Terhardt & Zick) but the results 
Fletcher cites tend to be accurate.
Diana Deutsch's 1982 "The Psychology of Music"  summarizes key  
psychoacoustic results by many of reserachers who made the original 
findings.   Most of the  contributors are biased toward one or another tuning 
and the reader must take care to separate experimental results from the 
conclusions drawn by the various authors.  As has been seen, the conclusions 
of various researchers are on occasion mere opinions, unsupported by the 
facts.  The data cited in Deutsch's compilation are extensive and accurate, 
although the bibliogpraphies for each section prove distinctly selective.
"Psychological Acoustics," edited by E.D. Herbert, is a collection of the 
original papers in psychocoustics from the 1870s to the 1970s. This is the 
only text which amasses all the original results in the original authors' own 
words.  Much of the material is now dated, however, and therefore provides 
an incomplete picture of the ear/brain system.
"Auditory Scene Analysis," by Albert S. Bregman, 1990, is a disappointment. 
It is vague on crucial points and does not cite enough psychoacoustic 
references.  While Bregman does not exhibit major biases toward any 
specific tuning system, he appears to gloss over many difficult areas of 
psychoacoustics; viz., the contradictory evidence for various theories of 
hearing, unexplained ear/brain phenomena, the role of musical illusions in 
the auditory path, etc. 
On the whole Bregman's text is useful as a quick overview but should not be 
cited as a primary source.
The next and last post of this series will discuss the higher-level 
ineraction of tuning, timbre and structural tonality as considered by
Rothenberg, Keislar, Douthett and as examined in the work of Pierce, Risset, Sethares, Carlos, et al.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Wed, 18 Oct 1995 18:02 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id JAA13167; Wed, 18 Oct 1995 09:01:51 -0700
Date: Wed, 18 Oct 1995 09:01:51 -0700
Message-Id: <Pine.A32.3.91.951011123529.42758B-100000@freenet2.freenet.ufl.edu>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu