source file: mills2.txt
Date: Wed, 27 Sep 1995 08:13:43 -0700



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Psychoacoustics - post 4 of 25
---
The ear itself is the gateway to new kinds
of harmony and new forms of music.  The
more we learn about the subtleties of the
ear/brain system, the wider the range of
xenharmonic musics we can make.
---
MYTH: EVERYONE KNOWS HOW THE EAR PERCEIVES
  PITCH. HELMHOLTZ EXPLAINED IT IN 1863.
FACT: Since 1841 there have been 3 competing theories
of how the ear operates. 
Some evidence supports, while other evidence 
contradicts, each hypothesis about 
how the ear perceives sound.
---
Ohm (1843) is the founder of modern hearing
theory.  "Ohm introduced the view that the
analyzing power of the hearing organ may be 
compared to the way in which periodic 
functions can be analyzed mathematically
by applying Fourier's theorem (Ohm 1843).
Helmholtz fully recognized the significance
of this hypothesis and based his theory on
it..." ["Experiments On Tone Perception,"
Plomp, R., 1967, pg. 102]
In effect both Ohm and Helmholtz viewed
the ear as a frequency analyzer. Ohm's First
Law states that the ear detects a pitch
only if there is significant acoustic
energy at the fundamental frequency of
that pitch, which (as we all know) consists
of a set of sine wave harmonics added
together.
---
Everyone knows this, and it's wrong.
Ohm's hypothesis was dealt a series of
blows by experimental evidence.
Researchers using crude light microscopes
from the 17th through the early 19th centuries
examined the cochlea and found what appeared
to be rods.  This naturally suggested a set of
tuned resonators--an idea which Helmholtz
picked up in the 1840s and elaborated into
the first (resonance) version of his theory of 
hearing.
"The principle of resonance, based on early work
of Galileo, was proposed as a way for low and high
tones to have different effects on the ear. For example,
in 1683 du Verney, in his `Traite de l'organe de
l'ourie,' suggested that a ribbon-like structure
along the length of the cochlea vibrates in different
places to different frequencies through resonance
by noting that the width of the ribbon changed from
one end of the cochlea to the other. (..) In 1851 Corti
described a number of the finer structures inside the 
cochlea, the most prominent of which he called teeth,
while others called them rods.  The inverted V is 
now called the "arch of Corti," but his vantage point
was from above, so that the arches appeared as extended
rods...  He described the rods as delicate, free, and flexible,
and he supposed that their movements stimulated acoustic
nerve fibers which, at the time, were believed to end 
in the vicinity of the rods." [Gulick, W. Lawrence, 
George A. Geschneider and Robert D. Frisina, "Hearing:
Physiological Acoustics, neural coding and Psychoacoustics,"
Oxford University Press, 1989, pg. 59]
The mistaken picture of the arches of Corti as resonating rods
was the one used by Helmholtz to support his earliest
"resonance" theory of hearing.
However, successive improvement in the resolution of
available light microscopes--due largely to the work
of the mathematician Abel--dealt a serious blow to
Helmholtz's 1863 "Tonemfindungen," in which he stated
in detail a theory of hearing he had presented in a lecture in
Bonn during the winter of 1857.
"In his public lecture in 1857, Helmholtz proposed that
sounds reaching the cochlea would set certain of the rods
of Corti in motion by sympathetic vibration.  He envisaged 
the rods as a set of tuned resonators, so that only those with
a natural frequency equal to that of the stimulus would vibrate
and thus stimulate only those acoustic fibers that served them."
[Gulick, W. Lawrence,  George A. Geschneider and Robert D. 
Frisina, "Hearing: Physiological Acoustics, neural coding and Psychoacoustics," Oxford University Press, 1989, pg. 60]
The subsequent microscopic "...discoveries of Deiters in 
1860 made it clear that the rods of Corti were unsuitable as 
resonators because they were arches rather than independent 
rods. So, in `Empfindungen,' Helmholtz revised his theory by
shifting the resonators to the transverse fibers of the basilar
membrane, a membrane "stretched" across the cochlear tube."
[Gulick, W. Lawrence,  George A. Geschneider and Robert D. 
Frisina, "Hearing: Physiological Acoustics, neural coding and Psychoacoustics," Oxford University Press, 1989, pg. 61]
In keeping with the ancient principle of likeness, according
to which features of the nervous system symbolzed the external
world, Helmholtz adopted the doctrine of "specific nerve energies," 
which stated that each nerve responded to a unique stimulus
and only to that stimulus.  This doctrine was proposed by Helmholtz's
teacher Johannes Mueller in 1838 in Mueller's `Handbuch der 
Physiologie,' but it was first stated by Herophilus and Eristratus 
in 490 B.C. and subsequently expounded by Aristotle in 344 B.C.
"By extending Mueller's doctrine, Helmholtz claimed that each 
acoustic nerve fiber had its own `quality,' so that, when activated, 
it always led to the perception of a particular pitch. (..) Accordingly,
frequency was coded by the place of stimulation along the longitudinal
axis of the cochlea." [Gulick, W. Lawrence,  George A. Geschneider and 
Robert D. Frisina, "Hearing: Physiological Acoustics, neural coding and Psychoacoustics," Oxford University Press, 1989, pg. 61]
This did not solve the problems with Helmholtz's theory of
hearing.  Instead, more and more dififculties began to appear
after its publication in 1863:
"First, the transverse fibers of the basilar membrane are 
neither under tension nor independent. Therefore, they are
ill-suited to serve the function ascribed to them in theory.
(..) Second, even if the transverse fibers were under tension
and independent suspended, the variation in fiber length and
mass is so restrictive as to limit resonance to a frequency
range that is only a small fraction of the total to which we
respond. (..)
"Third, there is a serious difficulty with the principle of 
resonance as a means to account for frequency discrimination.
(..) Fourth, since no resonance is wholly specific, Helmholtz's
theory also was criticized because a tone of a given frequency
would produce resonance not only in the tuned resonator but also
in those that are slightly mistuned.  Accordingly, one tone would
signal a number of places, and therefore, a number of pitches.
In 1900 Gray offered his hypothesis of maximum stimulation to
counter this objection. He proposed that the exactly tuned
resonator would also show maximum resonance, and it was this
trasnverse fiber that singaled the place for that tone. However,
he claimed that with intense stimulation many resonators would
be responding at the practical maxima, and since the precision of
the place would thereby be lost, he predicted that differential
pitch sensitivity would worsen as a function of increasing
intensity.  Psychophysical data show the opposite to be true.
(..) Fifth, Helmholtz assumed that changes in stimulus intensity
produced changes in stimulus magnitude.  However, by 1914, the
work of Adrian on the all-or-none property of neural action seemed 
emphatically to deny this requirement of the Helmholtz theory.
As the current century began, the resonance-place theory of hearing 
was in some trouble."  [Gulick, W. Lawrence,  George A. Geschneider and 
Robert D. Frisina, "Hearing: Physiological Acoustics, neural coding and Psychoacoustics," Oxford University Press, 1989, pg. 63]
Other strong doubts about the Helmholtz or "place" theory of hearing 
arose as a result of Seebeck's experiments in 1843.
"He constructed a siren from a forced air system, in front of which
he placed a rotating disk with small holes separated by specific 
distances so as to produceshort sound pulses separated by
precisely specified time intervals. (..) The pitch of this periodic
pulse was the same as that of a 500-Hz tone.  This is not surprising,
since the pulse train delivered 500 pulses/sec. A more surprising
result occurred when pulses alternated between two slightly
different values. Although the timing between pulses
had been changed only slightly...the perceived pitch dropped
dramatically from that of a 500-Hz tone to that of a 250-Hz tone
despite the fac that most of the energy in this slightly
modified stimulus was still at 500 hz.  The physical property
that was clearly altered by ths light change in pulse timing was the
period. (..) This change in pitch was attributed to the change in
the period of repeating sound pressure wave and eventually became
known as periodicity pitch." [Gulick, W. Lawrence, George A.
Geschneider and Robert D. Frisina, "Hearing: Physiological Acoustics,
Neural Coding, and Psychoacoustics," Oxford University Press, 
1989, pg. 257]
As Gulick et alii point out, "Seebeck's work was important because it
led investigators to consider the timing of neural impulses as a 
possible neural code for pitch perception. The place and neural synchrony
[periodicity] theories represent two very different views on how the
nervous system codes pitch.  For the place theorist it is the frequency
spectrum of the stimulus that is important, whereas for the neural
synchrony theorist it is some aspect of the time waveform, such as 
the period, that is important. (..) The controversy between proponents
of two viewpoint gained momentum in the 1940s with the work of
 Schouten." [Gulick, et al., 1989, pg. 258]
Pierce describes hearing Schouten's effect first-hand: "He had constructed
a sort of optical siren (Figure 6-4) by means of which he could produce sounds with various waveforms.  Using this, he produced sounds with harmonically related partials... Then, by proper  adjustments, he 
could cancel out the fundamental frequency... I could hear
this fundamental frequency come and go, but the pitch of the sound 
did not change at all.  In some way, my ear inferred the proper pitch 
from the harmonics..." ["The Science of Musical Sound," Pierce,
2nd ed., 1992, pg. 92;  also see Ohm, G.S., "Ueber die Definition des 
Tones, nebst daran geknuepfer Theorie der Sirene und aehnlicher 
tonbildener Vorrichtungen," Ann. Phys. Chem, Vol. 59, ppg. 513-565,
also see  Schouten, "The Perception of subjective tones," Proceedings 
of the Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, 1938, 
vol. 41, pp.  1083-1093.]
While most of the details of Helmholtz's theory of hearing are now
known to be inaccurate, parts of the underlying idea  were adopted 
in the "place" theory of hearing.  According to this theory, just intonation
is the ideal musical tuning and the 4:5:6 chord which stands at the
center of traditional Western harmony is a necessary outcome of
the physical structure of the human auditory system.
As will be seen, however, all of the objections to Helmholtz's
theory remain troublesome even to modern-day place theories. 
 The modern place theory cannot explain the simultaneously fine 
frequency discrimination  of the ear and its broad range of frequency response; the modern place theory cannot explain the missing fundamental;
nor can it  explain how the relatively wide travelling waves on the
basilar membrane give rise to delicate pitch judgments.  The
modern place theory cannot explain how the ear can detect
the pitch of tones whose fundamental lies below  rougly 150 Hz.  
The modern place theory cannot explain how only 3000 hair cells
account for the measured jnd of the average subject; the modern
place theory cannot explain why louder sounds are more
accurately judged in frequency when the opposite is predicted
from conventional frequency; and the modern place theory cannot
explain categorical perception, the encoding of pitch and
amplitude in the auditory nerve, the universal human preference
for stretched intervals and beat rates between 4 and 6 Hz, and
so on.
Thus there is substantial reason to doubt that either small integer
ratios or 4:5:6 chords consitute either a privileged or even a
necessary outcome of the human ear/brain system. 
On the other hand, some aspects of the auditory system are
convincingly explained by the modern place theory.  The cocktail
party effect, the ability to perceive the pitch of tones with
a high-pitched fundamental. "Furthermore, support for the view
that perception ohte pitch of them issing fundamental is not due 
to the excitation of low freuqency-sensitive neurons responding
to low freuqnecy distortion products of a complex tone comes
from observatiosn that a low frequency masking noise presented 
with the high freuqnecy complex tone does not eliminate the
perception of the missing fundamental." [Gulick, et al., 1989, pg. 259] 
The next post will examine in greater detail the place theory
of hearing, and the psychoacoustic evidence for and against it,
along with the implications for tuning and music.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Wed, 27 Sep 1995 19:26 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id KAA06522; Wed, 27 Sep 1995 10:26:35 -0700
Date: Wed, 27 Sep 1995 10:26:35 -0700
Message-Id: <199509271725.KAA19263@osiris.ac.hmc.edu>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu