source file: mills2.txt
Date: Fri, 14 Mar 1997 10:34:12 -0800

Subject: What Einstein believed (Paul E)

From: Manuel.Op.de.Coul@ezh.nl (Manuel Op de Coul)

From: PAULE <ACADIAN/ACADIAN/PAULE%Acadian@mcimail.com>

Einstein has been called "the last classical physicist." He pushed a 19th 
century viewpoint as far as it could go in explaining the world. He espoused 
a "principle of reality" that he thought would govern any physical theory. 
After Einstein's death, John Bell showed that quantum mechanics contradicts 
Einstein's principle of reality, and countless experiments have settled the 
question in favor of quantum mechanics. The two most important attempts at 
reconciling realism with physics have been Bohm's theory and the many-worlds 
interpretation. These theories leave dicussions of an ether far behind.

Quantum field theory, aside from general relativity the most accurate 
scientific theory known, explains forces in terms of exchanges of particles 
and fields in terms of virtual particles continually coming into and out of 
existence. In some cases, such as the strong nuclear force, the intermediary 
particles themselves are subject to the very forces they mediate, making 
mathematical understanding very difficult; computer simulations are 
currently the best way of understanding the strong nuclear force. The 
concept of an ether is again left far behind, even in the most "realist" 
ways of discussing the subject matter such as Feynman's.

Any attempt at a new physical theory must deal with all these issues and 
explain the phenomena better and more accurately than existing theories. 
Although there is nothing wrong with speculation and imagination, especially 
for musical inspiration, a critique of modern physical theory cannot begin 
without a solid understanding of what we have learned in the last century. 
Ray Tomes' discussions are guided by a distinctly 19th century understanding 
(I could provide ample evidence but don't want to start a thread here). This 
view of the world is eminently comfortable and is held by nearly every 
student of physics at one time or another. Upon learning of the discoveries 
of modern physics, the student is almost invariably overtaken by feelings of 
shock and disbelief, and attempts to distort the evidence to fit the 
classical understanding. This was the reaction of most of the scientific 
community, including Einstein, in the first few decades of this century.

Physics and mathematics have made such tremendous advances in this century 
that the understanding of our political and moral leaders, artistic and 
literary figures, and most intellectuals have at best only begun to scratch 
the surface of what has been learned. Mostly there is misinformation, and 
not a few "scientists" and "science educators" are badly misinformed and 
propagate the misinformation. The quality of education has not kept pace 
with the advances in physics and mathematics, so most of us are left far 
behind. Feeling frustrated at this situation, many rebel; rather than 
studying physics so that they can construct better theories, the 
reactionaries spout very respectable-sounding 19th century dogma and claim 
that the establishment took a wrong turn in this century.

It is an unhappy situation to have acquired such a firm and comprehensive 
understanding of the world and then have the rug pulled out from under your 
feet. Scientists considered the field of physics to be nearing a close at 
the end of the 19th century. But soon a few holes in the dam began to 
appear, and not long after the whole structure came toppling down. From the 
bricks that remained, Planck's radiation equation, the Lorentz 
transformations, etc., a new structure was erected that was bizarre by all 
accounts but beautiful nonetheless. The work done remains incomprehensible 
to anyone who has not dedicated all their intellectual resources to the 
subject for years at a time. The motivations for such dedication have 
dwindled tremendously as the short-term value of pure science is 
overshadowed by that of applied science, and the social respectability one 
obtains by dealing in increasingly abstract disciplines is near the bottom 
of the ladder. As a result, there are fewer and fewer capable teachers of 
physics and the ignorance of the public increases.

So for now, back to music.

 -Paul E.

Received: from ns.ezh.nl [137.174.112.59] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Fri, 14 Mar 1997 20:13 +0100
Received: by ns.ezh.nl; (5.65v3.2/1.3/10May95) id AA17904; Fri, 14 Mar 1997 20:13:10 +0100
Received: from ella.mills.edu by ns (smtpxd); id XA17900
Received: from  by ella.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	 id LAA25538; Fri, 14 Mar 1997 11:11:18 -0800
Date: Fri, 14 Mar 1997 11:11:18 -0800
Message-Id: <v01510101af4ed989048a@[134.173.37.15]>
Errors-To: madole@mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@ella.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@ella.mills.edu