source file: mills2.txt
Date: Tue, 31 Oct 1995 10:27:18 -0800



From: "John H. Chalmers" <non12@cyber.net>

From: mclaren
Subject: Models of reality, the Fourier
  mindset, and negative eigenvalues in
  Sturm-Liouville problems
---
Charles Lucy has been regularly pilloried
in this forum for his doubts about the
Fourier analysis model of acoustic
systems.  Several months ago, in Topic
1 of Digest 404, John Chalmers also stated 
that "I can think of no physical principle 
which would favor flat fifths over natural..." 
This is a concise expression of a general
attitude among acousticians and music
theorists, most of whom are not fully
conversant with the physics behind the
conventional textbook description of
vbrating strings and air columns.
In fact there are good solid physical  reasons 
why no simple harmonic mechanical oscillator
ever produces strictly harmonic oscillations,
and will instead tend to generate partials
which are either systematically stretched
or shrunk by comparison with the expected
harmonics.  There are also excellent physical
reasons why 2- and 3-dimensional physical
oscillators will in general not exhibit either
linear or harmonic oscillatory behavior at all.
This point bears on Lucy's criticism of the
Fourier analysis mindset that characterizes
much of the discussion of this forum, and
in a larger sense it also bears on the question
of which tunings we use--or even contemplate
using.
Ultimately, the musics we choose to make are
limited by our model of the world.  Whenever
we tune an instrument, we inevitably begin
to impose a structure on physical reality:
and the type of structure we choose to impose
is determined by our preconceptions.
In the West and Mideast, ever since the time
of Pythagoras and almost certainly (before
that) the Babylonians and the Egyptians, we
(in the West) have conceived of the universe as ruled
by number.  The predictive value of number is a
touchstone of classical Hellenic thought.
This had profound implications
for the kind of music made in Greece and
the European cultures.
However, other cultures bring other
preconceptions to the process of tuning.
There is no evidence (as Marc Perlman has
pointed out) that the Javanese, the Balinese,
or any of the other cultures of Southeast
Asia conceive of the universe as a manifestion
of number, except perhaps in the Kabalist
sense implied by gematria, the geomancy of the
Dogon peoples of Mali, etc.  Thus their tuning systems do 
not arise from mathematical or physical-acoustic
considerations, and as a result Javanese and
Balinese music does not employ the 2:1 octave,
4:5:6 harmonies or harmonic-series timbres. The
same is true of the  musics found in Africa,
Central Asia, most of the South Seas islands and
South America.
None of these cultures appear to conceive of
music in the mathematical framework typical
of Western thinking; indeed, as Jon Appleton
has pointed out, in many other cultures
music is often not analyzed at all, but regarded
as belonging to same realm as magic.
Thus one's preconceptions exert a potent
influence on the kind of music one chooses 
to make, and different models of reality
produce different kinds of tuning.
The simple harmonic oscillator equation
is one model of reality.  
There are many others even within the
confines of Western mathematics.
According to the simple harmonic motion 
equation, the displacement
x = A*sin(sqrt(k/m)*t) + B*cos(sqrt(k/m)*t)
where k is the spring constant, m is
the mass, and t is the elapsed time
(A and B are constants of propotionality).
This is a recipe for perfectly harmonic
behaviour.   
But the equation which describes
simple harmonic motion is a drastic
simplification of reality, and there
are many other (more sophisticated)
mathematical models which describe
the same physical oscillatory system.
For example, when a simple tube is
excited with a laminar airflow the air
in the tube will oscillate at a characteristic
frequency determined by the length of
the tube, the density of the air, the
location and number of tone holes, etc.
Increasing the airflow produces a  stronger
second harmonic, and so on, according
to this model.
But in the real world two modes of
oscillation (fundamental and second harmonic)
in a tube tend to "pull in" toward each other
so that the fundamental rises slightly in
frequency, while the second harmonic drops
slightly in frequency.  The simple harmonic
motion model of reality cannot explain this
because it views air molecules as billiard
balls connected by springs, and
the system cannot behave in any but
a perfectly harmonic way.
If instead we look at the air-filled tube as
an energy exchange system from a 
thermodynamic viewpoint, or if we
view it as a state-space system, or
if we consider it from the standpoint
of continuum mechanics, the reasons
for the slight inharmonicity of the
oscillations become obvious.  Setting
up a fundamental mode of oscillation in the 
the tube changes its acoustical admittance;
a second oscillation mode will then lose energy
or gain energy, depending on the phase
of its compressions and rarefactions 
relative to that of the fundamental mode.
Since the system will tend to minimize its
overall potential energy the two acoustic
modes will couple; and because the 
system is closed (negigibly energy is
lost via acoustic radiation), the energy lost
from the second mode of oscillation has
to go somewhere and not all of it will be
either transmitted out the bore of the 
tube or lost as friction against the walls
or in the friction created by turbulent non-laminar
flow around the tone holes, etc.  Thus the
energy lost from the second mode of oscillation
will partly flow into the fundamental mode of
oscillation, which in turn forces a 
change in its period.
This example serves as a warning about
the models we use to explain physical
system, and consequently to justify the
tuning systems we use.  In the case
just considered, the inharmonic behaviour
is slight--as long as flow of air through
the tube remains slow and laminar.  Thus 
it can be handled by perturbation theory,
as in lord Rayleigh's "Acoustics" of 1896. But
as the airflow increases, the flow becomes 
non-laminar.  Multiphonics appear;
then the oscillation patterns become
quasi-periodic, start to break up, and
finally become completely aperiodic.
The oscillation turns to noise.
Viewed as a simple energy exchange
system, our model cannot explain this.
But if we step back yet again and realize
that the energy-exchange system we've
been picturing is a drastic simplification
the reason for this behaviour becomes clear.
If, instead, we view the partial differential equations 
which describe the interaction of non-linear
acoustic admittance,  non-laminar airflow and
radiated, transmitted and absorbed mechanical
energy, and boundary conditions from the
viewpoint of complexity theory...  Then it becomes
obvious why the system beahves as it does.
"Little is known concerning boundary value
problems for general nonlinear differential
equations..." [Courant and Hilbert, "Methods
of Mathematical Physics," 1962, pg. 367.
For the class of hyperbolic PDEs which
describe one-dimensional physical
oscillatory systems, perturbation theory
is the classical method of dealing with
the increased airflow described above. 
But as we've seen this does not work
beyond a very limited regime.  Nonlinear
dynamics must be invoked beyond the region
of non-laminar airflow, and in this regime
the oscillations in the tube move from
being ordinary attractors in phase space
to being strange attractors, whose behaviour
not only jumps back and forth between
aperiodicity and quasi-peridiodicity, but
also spans the complete gamut from
pure noise to harmonic oscillation. Viewed
in phase space, the operation of the compressions
and rarefactions in the air of the tube follow
orbits which can be bounded, yet not precisely
predicted, and which depend crucially on
initial conditions.
Lest you imagine such chaotic behaviour is
restricted only to airflow in tubes,
note that in the case of the wave equation
describing the general nonhomogeneous 
vibrating string "whenever an eigenvalue is
negative an aperiodic motion occurs 
instead of the corresponding normal
mode." [Courant and Hilbert, "Methods of
Mathematical Physics," Vol. 1, pg 292]
Thus chaotic oscillation can occur
even in vibrating strings--in fact
in any one-dimensional oscillator
described by a Sturm-Liouville
eigenvalue problem.
This is not commonly known.
Why?   
Because every textbook on acoustics
which treats the wave equation and
the vibrating string  assumes
that the egienvalues will never become
negative.  As a result, the true complexity
of the behjvaiour of even so-called
"simple" 1-D physical oscillatory systems
is masked from the unquestioning students.
(These simplifying assumptions are made
so that the equations can be quickly and
easily solved.  The usual dodge is to claim
that "negative eigenvalues have no physical
significance." As so often in physics and
engineering, this is a fudge.  In fact 
the problem is just systematically
restricted and our viewpoint successively
limited until we arrive at equations which 
undergrad-level mathematics can dispatch 
with elegance in a neat closed form.)
And what does all this have to do with
tuning?
The debate on this forum has mostly centered
around a restricted set of musical tunings--
JI, meantone, a few equal temperaments which
well approximate the lower members of the
harmonics series.  And this tiny subset of
tunings is derived from simplistic physical 
models (as we've seen).  These acoustic models
are described by the usual textbook
solutions of the wave equation, simple
harmonic motion, and the rest of the
18th- and 19th-century baggage.
But the reality can be very different from
the universe predicted by these 18th-century
mathematical models.  
"For three centuries science has successfully
uncovered many of the workings of the
universe, armed with the mathematics of
Newton and Leibniz.  It was essentially a
clockwork world, one characterized by
repetition and predictability. (..) Most of
nature, however, is nonlinear and is not
easily predicted. (..) In nonlinear systems
small inputs can lead to dramatically
large consequences." [Lewin, Roger, 
"Complexity," 1993, pg. 12]
By now it should now be clear why the Fourier 
transform has gained such popularity, and also 
why Charles Lucy's doubts about it are
well-founded.  In "a clockwork world,
one characterized by regularity and
predictability," a mathematical technique
which breaks all physical oscillations
down into sets of perfectly periodic
sinusoidal functions with no beginning
and no end makes a lot of sense.  In a
clockwork 18th-century universe, the
Fourier transform enjoys enormous descriptive
power.
But we now know that the 18th-century clockwork
model of the world is not a complete picture.  In the
real world, where chaotic strange attractors
characterize the action of real oscillatory
systems, the Fourier transform often falls apart.
And instead of describing reality, the Fourier
transform can put blinders on us and prevent
us from seeing the world as it really is.
In some cases, this is unimportant--because
the oscillations of real physical systems are
sometimes only a little different from the simplistic
clockwork-universe description of the Fourier
Theorem.  In instruments like strings, winds
and brasses (after the initital attack of the
tone is over, and if the instruments aren't
played too loudly, and if we're talking only
about the notes in the middle range of these
instruments) a short-time Fourier analysis
tells us *something* about what's going on
in *some* of the notes, during *part* of
their duration.  But even for this restricted
class of sounds, Fourier techniques fail 
during the first 10 milliseconds or so of the
note's attack. FFTs fail because when t < 10ms  
the amplitude and frequency of the component
partials are both changing with great rapidity,
and the Fourier transform *cannot* provide
accurate information about both the period
*and* the spectrum of an input function. An
increase in resolution in one parameter forces
a descrease in resolution in the other.  This is
inherent in the mathematics of the FFT, and
*cannot* be sidestepped.
A much greater limitation on the Fourier mindset
is the fact that most of the musical instruments used 
by most of the cultures in the world are not violins
or French horns or flutes.  Most of the musical
instruments used by other cultures are two- 
or three-dimensional oscillators which 
generate inharmonic partials & noise, and store
energy from one vibrational cycle to the next...
so that their behaviour is often extraordinarily 
non-linear.  See Rossing's discussion of the
energy storage from one cycle to the next in
a tam-tam, for example. [Rossing, 1992]
For such instruments, the Fourier description
is a hindrance rather than an aid to understanding.
And the class of tunings to which we in the west 
have systematically restricted
ourselves--namely JI, meantone and equal
temperaments with good approximations of 
the lower harmonics--are also inadequate for
such instruments. 
This perhaps addresses John Chalmers' doubts
about the validity of any "physical system that
would favor flat fifths over natural." Simply
moving from one-dimensional physical oscilaltors
to two- and three-dimensional oscillators
generate fifths which are either *very* flat or
*very* sharp (depending on the oscillatory
geometry)...indeed, the whole 18th- and 19th-century
armamentarium of Western acoustic terminology is 
inapplicable to such  physical oscillators: "fifth" and 
"third" and "natural harmonics" are terms without
meaning for such physical systems. The tam-tam
or the metallophone or the vibrating drumhead
or (as we've seen) even purportedly "simple"
one-dimensional systems like the vibrating
string often operate in the region of complexity...
a region of oscillation that lies between the
complete chaos of noise and the clockwork perfection
of perfect harmonicity.  The Fourier view of
the universe does not yield useful information
when applied to such acoustic systems, or
even when applied to a vibrating string characterized
by negative eigenvalues in the associated
Sturm-Liouville equations.
One of the central revelations of complexity
theory is that patterns lie hidden in chaos.
Emergent order appears ex nihilio when 
systems reach the edge of chaotic behavior,
as in woodwind multiphonics, etc.  In fact
the Brookhaven National Laboratory phsyicist
Per Bak has developed the hypothesis that
dynamical systems naturally evolve toward
a critical state in which the edge of chaos
spontaneously generates order. [See Bak, P.
and Chen  K,. in Scientific American, Jan. 1991;
also see Packard, N., "Adaptation Toward the
Edge of Chaos," Technical Report, Center for
Complex Systems Research, University of
Illinois, CCSR-88-5, 1988.]
What does this have to do with tuning &
music?
It seems possible (if not probable) that
non-just non-equal-tempered tunings 
represent an adaptation toward spontaneous
order generated by the non-linear dynamical
systems used in so many other musical
cultures (i.e., two- and three-dimensional
physical oscillatory systems: drums, 
flat or curves metal plates, non-linearly
coupled oscillators like those used in
parts of Africa in conjuction with resonant
strings, etc).
Interestingly enough, throwing away the
Fourier transform does not mean a loss
of predictive power.  Many other analytic
models for acoustic systems exist: Walsh
transforms, Daubechies wavelets, Gabor's
acoustic quantum, and even more recent
non-linear mathematical transforms such
as the slope transform [See Maragos, P., 
"Slope Transforms: Theory and Application 
to Nonlinear Signal Processing," IEEE
Trans. Sig. Proc.,  43(40, Paril 1995, pp. 
864-877.]
The fact that so astute and insightful
a thinker as John Chalmers could fall
into the trap of looking at all tuning
systems and physical oscillators through
the narrow distorting lens of the
Fourier transform is an indication of
the power the Fourier mindset to
brainwash the unwary.  While the Fourier
transform is a marvellous mathematical tool,
is does not describe all of acoustic reality--
only a small part of it.
Thus  Charles Lucy's doubts about the
universal value of the FFT are well
founded, and the attacks he has suffered
for voicing these doubts in this forum
are an indication of just how thoroughly
the Fourier mindset can blind us to the
wonderfully complex nature of real 
instruments, real tunings and real music
in the real world.
--mclaren

Received: from eartha.mills.edu [144.91.3.20] by vbv40.ezh.nl
           with SMTP-OpenVMS via TCP/IP; Tue, 31 Oct 1995 20:59 +0100
Received: from  by eartha.mills.edu via SMTP (940816.SGI.8.6.9/930416.SGI)
	for <coul@ezh.nl> id KAA08873; Tue, 31 Oct 1995 10:58:57 -0800
Date: Tue, 31 Oct 1995 10:58:57 -0800
Message-Id: <v01530502acbc2e7c1883@[194.137.64.56]>
Errors-To: madole@ella.mills.edu
Reply-To: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Originator: tuning@eartha.mills.edu
Sender: tuning@eartha.mills.edu